A New Opportunity For Peace
Sinn Féin Election Manifesto 1997

Sinn Féin 
(26 County) GENERAL ELECTION MANIFESTO 

CONTENTS 
1. Introductory letter from Gerry Adams, MP 
2. A New Opportunity for Peace 
3. Irish Political Prisoners 
4. Neutrality 
5. Empowering Communities -The fight against Drugs 
6. Crime 
7. The Economy -A future for Everyone 
8. An All-Ireland Economy 
9. Local Democracy 
10. Water Charges 
11. Rural Regeneration
12. Agriculture 
13. Fisheries 
14. Forestry 
15. Environment 
16. Women 
17. Youth 
18. Education 
19. Irish Language 


SINN FEIN 
BUILDING A DYNAMIC FOR CHANGE 

A Chara, 

As we approach the new millennium, we need to consider what we expect
as a nation. Are we to accept the continuation of division in our
society, between north and south, east and west, young and old,
wealthy and poor, men and women?

Or should we not, instead, embrace a vision for the future which puts
people first and seeks an end to the divisions which diminish us as a
nation?

Our vision is of a future in which people are united, in which there
are no borders and no limits on progress towards a just society based
on equality, respect for difference and the protection of the weak and
vulnerable.
 
Our vision is of a future where communities are empowered to take
greater control over developments which effect their lives. 

Our vision is of a future in which people, whatever their social or
economic status, feel that they are part of a Nation which accords
them

opportunity, dignity and the right to participate in the processes of
power which effect their lives. It is a republican vision.

Sinn Féin is a party committed to real social, economic and political
change. Play your part in creating change and in strengthening the
nationalist position in peace negotiations by voting Sinn Féin No.1 on
June 6th. 

Is mise, 

Gerry Adams M P


A NEW OPPORTUNITY FOR PEACE 
 
This general election could be the last of the twentieth century. It
will be a historic election in many ways as it will set the pattern
for government in this state as it enters the next century.
 
For Sinn Féin the priority is the establishment of a just and lasting
peace. The conflict in the north and the continuing divisions in our
country have had a profound effect on the political, social and
economic life of the 26 Counties. The prize of peace has dividends for
all of the Irish people.
 
A new opportunity for peace exists. The election of two Sinn Féin
MP's, Gerry Adams and Martin McGuinness and the results of the council
elections in the north have strengthened Sinn Féin's hand in pursuing
our strategy for peace and will have an impact far beyond the
constituencies they represent. 40% of northern nationalists have
endorsed Sinn Féin's peace strategy and our commitment to achieving
peace.
 
This election provides a further opportunity to strengthen the voice
of nationalist Ireland by endorsing Sinn Féin's analysis and electing
Sinn Féin TD's.  The great hope and expectation of August 1994 was
dashed by 18 months of stalling by a 10 '. British government which
put the short term survival of the Conservative government before
peace. John Major sold out the peace process to buy unionist support
at Westminster.  

The status quo in the north, illustrated by the events at Orumcree
cannot continue.
 
There is an alternative. There can be a peace settlement worked out
through real negotiations which address the issues of concern to all
parties.
 
There is a new government in Britain. That Labour government, with
it's clear majority holds the hope that the peace process can be
rebuilt on an inclusive basis.
 
The new Irish government will also have a vital role to play in making
this opportunity for peace a reality, avoiding the mistakes of the
last number of years.
 
Having Sinn Féin representatives in Leinster House will ensure that
Sinn Féin will be part of those negotiations. We seek your support in
our efforts to end conflict for good and to go into the next century
with a Ireland united and at peace.
 
A vote for Sinn Féin is a vote 
 
For a new opportunity for peace .For inclusive peace talks 
 
For a lasting peace settlement 
 
For national self determination for the Irish people.


IRISH POLITICAL PRISONERS

International experience shows that it is imperative that the issue of
political prisoners be addressed during the process of conflict
resolution. There are currently 380 Irish Republican Prisoners Of War
being held in jails in Ireland, Britain and the United States. 73 of
these are serving life sentences while 80 are serving sentences of 20
years or over.

The treatment of Irish political prisoners in English jails seriously
deteriorated following the IRA cessation of August 1994. Of the 28
Irish political prisoners in England, five are into their 22nd year of
imprisonment and 14 are being held in solitary confinement in Special
Secure Units (SSU's). Those held in SSU's are subjected to an inhumane
regime of 23 hour lock up, constant cell searches and are subjected to
closed visits.

All 41 Republican prisoners in Portlaoise jail are currently engaged
in a "non co-operation protest" following the decision of the
government to deny access to compassionate parole to a republican
prisoner, serving a forty year sentence, following the death of his
mother.  There are four Republican Prisoners serving forty year
sentences in Portlaoise. One of these men has served over sixteen
years while the other three have served almost thirteen years.

Immediate and unconditional release of all political prisoners held as
a result of the British/Irish conflict

All interested parties to oppose the British Government's treatment of
Irish Political prisoners. Britain has been guilty of gross violations
of Human Rights in relation to prisoners

Immediate transfer of all Irish Political prisoners from British and
American jails back to Ireland

Equality of treatment for compassionate parole for all Republican
prisoners in Portlaoise jail

Implementation of a release programme for the Forty Year Men held in
Portlaoise

No extradition of Irish citizens charged with political offences to
British jails



NEUTRALITY 
 
Sinn Féin is committed to the maintenance of positive neutrality and
an independent foreign policy. Neutrality is as valid today as it has
been in the past, as this generation of Irish people have invested it
with new meaning, relevant to the challenging international situation
that they face.
 
Being in favour of neutrality does not mean being anti-Europe. Ireland
should aim to promote European and International security through a
policy of disarmament and demilitarisation. Sinn Féin therefore
opposes the militarisation of the EU and the participation by Ireland
in NATO, the Western European Union or the Partnership for Peace. 
 
Military neutrality allows Ireland to maintain closer relationships
with people of the third world and to work with them for a more equal
distribution of the worlds resources.
 
Sinn Féin opposes the creation of an EU army 'to fight the resource
wars of the 21st century'. Involvement in an EU army would compromise
the valuable peace keeping role played by the Irish army serving
abroad under the auspices of the United Nations.
 



EMPOWERING COMMUNITIES - THE FIGHT AGAINST DRUGS 
 
The drugs crisis is now one of the major challenges facing Irish
society. Radical action is necessary to fight the spread of drugs
addiction, overdoses, anti-social crime, associated high rates of
imprisonment and an increase in HIV and AIDS related illnesses and
deaths. The scale of the drugs problem today is a direct result of the
failure to introduce the measures necessary to tackle the problem.
 
Sinn Féin has a track record of campaigning against drug abuse. In
October 1996 Sinn Féin launched a comprehensive set of recommendations
to tackle the drugs problem. Although some of these proposals were
implemented by the government much more needs to be done.
 
Immediate treatment for addicts. Nobody should have to wait for
treatment. Locally based treatment facilities established in
consultation with the community are essential.
 
Community drug teams, involving local GPs, social workers, voluntary
and community agencies should be established in areas affected by the
problem.
 
A co-ordinated approach by all the relevant state agencies is needed to target the major drug dealers and seize their assets 
 
Local communities have a central role to play in tackling the drugs
problem
 
Local authorities should evict drug dealers and local people must be
given a greater say in how their estates are managed
 
An end to Garda harassment of anti-drug activists. The Garda be made
accountable to the community. Changes in Garda management practices
are necessary to facilitate this
 
We recommend the establishment of a national forum with statutory
funding to draw up a comprehensive response to the drugs crisis
 


CRIME 
 
With both urban and rural areas experiencing increases in crime it has
become a major social and political issue. There are no instant
solutions, no easy options. There are many different types of crime,
and different types of crime have different potential solutions. Crime
will decrease when there is a co-ordinated response - social and
economic, as well as law enforcement - to deal with the many causes of
crime.
 
Government must invest in preventative programmes aimed at removing
the causes of crime. Locking more people up in "get tough" jail
regimes is not by itself a solution. Community rtni9'l facilities,
training and jobs are vital elements in tackling crime.
 
Sinn Féin supports: 
 
police strategies to tackle crime lords and anti-social gangs

Upgrading the court system to ensure speedy but fair trials

Prisons to focus on rehabilitation and training to help prevent
re-offending

Effective post-release monitoring and support measures 
 
Non-custodial sentences, e.g. community service and/or restitution to
the victim, where appropriate
 



THE ECONOMY
A FUTURE FOR EVERYONE 
 
Putting People First 
 
Sinn Féin's overall objectives for economic policy in Ireland are to
provide sustainable and dignified livelihoods for all its citizens; to
develop economic resources, human and material, to their fullest; and
to create an economic base which reflects the social and cultural
values of all the Irish people and which fulfils their material needs
and aspirations.
 
While wealth is undoubtedly being created in this state, the reality
of the Celtic Tiger is that ordinary people and whole communities both
urban and rural still endure entrenched unemployment, poverty,
multi-faceted disadvantage, social exclusion and endemic
inequalities. We have also faced the consequences of the litany of
financial scandals that taints both public and private sector
business.
 
Eliminating Inequality 
 
Increasingly we have seen the acceptance of the growing economic
division and the development of a low wage economy of 'yellow pack'
jobs and temporary employment schemes. This is not the inevitable
shape of the Irish economy.
 
A minimum wage should be introduced at a level advocated by the trade
union movement
 
It is a lack of political will not a lack of funds that has prevented
the government from ensuring that everyone has a decent standard of
living
 
The current levels of social welfare need to be increased. Current
long- term social welfare payments force families to live below
subsistence level
 
Imaginative ways of ensuring all people have access to employment and
a reasonable income and replacing existing employment schemes with
access to real jobs at the 'going rate', as advocated by the
Conference of Religious in Ireland, should be implemented
 
The low paid should be removed from the tax net.

Reform of the tax system to ensure that the present inequitable burden
carried by PAVE workers is removed
 
To assist local development the 10% cut in Forbairt's funding should
be reversed and more economic 7 resources directed to local and
community led enterprise
 
 



AN ALL IRELAND ECONOMY 
 
It is now widely accepted that an all lreland Economy would bring
considerable benefits. The Irish state is now advocating the bypassing
of the political structures in the north and south to create an
'island economy' based on co-operation in the areas of trade, economic
planning and infrastructural development. A more thorough economic
integration would bring greater benefits.
 
Sinn Féin advocates: 
 
the creation of an all-Ireland economy

the transformation of the economy of the six counties into a
productive and developed peacetime economy in harmony with plans for
an all Ireland economy
 
the elimination of the economic distortions created by partition
particularly in the border counties
 
a commitment to investment in social infrastructure the absolute
necessity of viewing economic development in the wider context of
social, political, cultural and environmental priorities
 
full parity of esteem and equality of treatment for all sections of
the community
 


LOCAL DEMOCRACY 
 
Local partnerships can allow genuine community involvement and
participation in economic and social policy. Their strength lies in
the origins as a community led initiative. The aim of policy in this
area should be to strengthen the partnerships and extend their role.
 
The resources available to partnerships must be seen to be truly
additional and should not displace existing public expenditure
 
Resources must be clearly targeted to the most disadvantaged areas and
to the most marginalised social groups

Partnership development projects should be considered for similar
access to tax concessions that have been made available to private
developers
 
The record of community enterprise initiatives throughout Ireland
clearly demonstrates that local enterprise has an essential
contribution to make to the development of the economy
 


WATER CHARGES 
 
The decision to abolish urban water charges and to introduce a subsidy
for the provision of domestic water supply for water schemes is
welcome. Service charges are an inequitable method of raising tax as
they are in no way related to the ability to pay.
 
Since the inception of this form of double taxation Sinn Féin has
consistently opposed these charges at Council and community level and
have worked with many groups seeking their abolition. The Federation
Of Group Water Schemes, the Federation of Dublin Anti-Water Charges
and the many community groups who campaigned against water rates
deserve the real tributes and congratulations for the removal of this
tax. Sinn Féin reiterate our support for equality of treatment of all
citizens, whether urban or rural resident.

The crisis over service charges is a symptom of the political vacuum
that exists in local government. The refusal of central government to
regulate for effective, representative and empowered local government
is the real problem that needs to be tackled.
 
Sinn Féin calls for: 
 
An amnesty for nonpayers and tax exemptions given to those who have
already paid this form of double tax
 
Enhancing the role of the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) in
relation to water quality
 


RURAL REGENERATION 
 
Economic and social problems are not confined to urban areas. Rural
areas throughout Ireland have a long history of political and economic
marginalisation. While unemployment is rife, there is also substantial
underemployment, low incomes, high emigration and poor access to
health and social services.
 
Sinn Féin believes that the objective for rural areas should be a
healthy and diverse economic and social environment where quality of
life is enhanced by equality of opportunity.
 

An integrated strategy for rural development is required in terms of
partnerships between government, development agencies, private
business and, in particular, local communities so that full
participation and accountability takes place.
 
Agricultural diversification into small industry and processing of
quality foods targeted at niche markets needs to take place. This will
help to ensure that farming continues to play an important part in the
rural economics
 
There must be an improved transport infrastructure to increase access
to rural areas
 
Sustainable and environmentally friendly tourism should be developed
that meets the needs and wishes of local communities
 
A rural investment bank, offering low-interest loans and technical
advice to small farmers and local areas starting community
enterprises, should be developed.
 


AGRICULTURE 
 
Irish farmers, their families and the rural communities they make up
have found themselves in an impossible position in the Ireland of the
1990s. The years of CAP funding have created gross inequities where
80% of the benefits have gone to 20% of the farmers. Now thousands of
farmers have found themselves either in debt or working holdings which
have been deemed economically unviable. Teagasc the agricultural
advisory body in the 26 Counties has estimated that up to 5,000 people
will leave farming every year in the 1990s. Furthermore despite the
fact that EU funds now account for approximately 50% of average farm
income, there is no concern in government at our dependency on the EU
or on its effects on the I rish economy.
 
Agricultural policy must be directed towards keeping the maximum
number of active farmers in rural Ireland
 
Low interest loans to be made available to assist small farmers
.Aggressive overseas marketing to overcome the BSE scare
 
All farmers convicted of Angel Dust use in beef production or of using
BSE infected animals to maximise herd depopulation compensation to be
banned from livestock production
 
Cases of farm families in financial difficulties to be resolved by
negotiation not by eviction
 


FISHERIES 
 
The history of Irish fisheries is not a story of success. It is rather
a story of a struggle for survival against political ineptness and
indifference and international exploitation of Irish coastal
communities and the resources they depend upon. Ireland possesses 16%
of EU fishing waters yet has just .3% of the EU tonnage and 2.5% of
the EU fleet.
 
Sinn Féin proposes: 
 
an end to overlishing or illegal fishing by other EU countries
 
the effective policing of flagships ie non nationals posing as Irish
and fishing our quota
 
rejection of attempts to create a non commercial three mile fishing
zone
 
increased funding for the modernisation of the Irish fishing fleet
 
a coherent policy to protect the "Continental Shelf", Ireland's main
fish spawning ground
 
an early and fundamental reform of the Common Fisheries Policy ahead
of the planned review in 2002
 


FORESTRY 
 
Forests occupy almost 8% of the land area of this state with planting
rates now approaching 30,000 hectares per annum. While 80% of the
forest estate remains in public ownership there has been a massive
increase in private ownership in recent years much of which has been
poorly regulated.
 
Much tree planting at present is being carried out in an unbalanced
fashion with too much emphasis on conifer plantation and not enough on
deciduous hardwood trees which are native to Ireland. Conifer trees
now comprise over 80% of planting in this state.
 
There needs to be proper management of forestry as blanket forestry is
threatening rural communities. The level of forestry has already
reached saturation point in some areas leading to depopulation.
 
Properly controlled forestry development can be achieved by 

supporting public ownership and control of forestry
 
maximising the involvement and employment of local communities in the
developing forestry industry which will help to reverse depopulation
of the countryside
 
adopting a balanced approach to forestry with incentives to plant
native broad-leaved trees wherever appropriate
 
encouraging small industries which produce recycled paper products
 


ENVIRONMENT 
 
For too long environmental issues have been divorced from the social
realities of everyday life. Sinn Féin is committed to correcting that
imbalance. We cannot hope to eradicate our consume-and-throw-society
overnight but we can begin by making changes at home and in the
workplace. The aim must be to create less pollution, use energy
wisely, reuse and recycle waste and establish integrated transport
systems. Sinn Féin will campaign for a better environment by:
 
opposing the building of a national incinerator
 
continuing to support local communities in the campaign against
nuclear dumping in the Irish sea.  

calling for the closure of Sellafield
 
supporting incentives to minimise the production of waste and
encourage recycling
 
supporting the use of an eco tax to deter companies from over
packaging their products
 
reducing the use of non bio-degradable plastic
 
encouraging the development of organic farming and ban genetically
engineered food
 
making the control of water pollution in coastal water and in rivers a
priority
 



WOMEN 
 
Although women now have formal legal equality in most areas of public
life they are a long way from having real equality. A minority of
married women work outside the home. Employed women earn less than men
and their employment choices are more restricted and there is little
recognition of the valuable work women do in the home.
 
Only 12% of TDs are women and women are grossly under represented in
most other areas of public life.
 
The physical and sexual abuse of women is increasing in Irish society.

To achieve real equality for women Sinn Féin is advocating

measures to achieve equality of representation both in political life
and in appointments to all public bodies. Women must be
 
involved in making the laws that affect their lives
 
the setting of time scales to achieve equality of outcome in
employment structures, education and training
 
as child care has been identified as the biggest difficulty faced by
women wanting to work or participate in public life, the provision of
child care facilities and subsidies for childcare must be a priority
 
area partnerships, as new structures, should be set up with the aim of
ensuring gender equality
 


YOUTH 
 
With over 40% of the population under 25 years of age the 26 Counties
has the youngest population in the EU. According to recent figures,
almost 62,000 people between 18 and 25 years of age are signing on the
live register. While unemployment rates have decreased over the past
three years Youth Unemployment is still running at twice the rate of
unemployment for those over 25.
 
Real jobs and quality education and training should be provided for
young people. They should not be forced into dead end schemes to
massage the unemployment figures
 
Sinn Féin will oppose any diminishing of a young persons social
welfare entitlements
 
Funding for youth services and recreation facilities should be
increased
 
Given the decline in the turn out of young voters in recent years,
Sinn Féin supports the holding of elections on a weekend to facilitate
the participation of students
 


 
 
EDUCATION 
 
Primary and secondary schools remain disgracefully underfunded. 81% of
primary schools nave to raise their own funds for basic needs like
heating and teaching materials. This creates an unequal situation as
schools in disadvantaged areas cannot raise this extra funding.
 

Sinn Féin proposes: 
 
priority funding of pre-schools in disadvantaged areas
 
the full funding of all primary and secondary schools 

funding for Irish language schools
 
a change in funding priorities so that a larger percentage of the
education budget goes to primary schools 

decreases in class sizes
 
introduction of a realistic maintenance subsidy for third level
students
 
increased grants for young people from disadvantaged areas to go on to
third level
 



IRISH LANGUAGE 
 
Teiliffís na Gaeilge despite its detractors, has proved that Irish is
a living and vibrant language. It's success is thanks to the work of
thousands of Gaeilgeoirí and enthusiasts who demanded their rights and
are beginning to see the fruits of their labours.
 
To build on these gains Sinn Féin proposes: 
 
immediate recognition and funding for Irish language schools .an
all-Irish university
 
a bill of rights ensuring equality of treatment for Gaeilgeoirí all TV
and radio stations to transmit not less than 12.5% of programmes
through Irish
 





