In granting a strong preference in admissions to applicants from a select group of racial and ethnic minorities, the Law School invokes an interest that the Court has never accepted as a compelling justification for racial preferences, which it must be to pass the settled requirements of strict scrutiny. Unlike the one interest--identified discrimination--that the Court's precedents have  [*16]  recognized as sufficiently compelling to support narrowly-tailored remedies, the Law School's asserted interest in diversity is incapable of being measured with reference to past injury, or to anything other than the ill-defined nature of the diversity interest itself. It is an interest with as many potential definitions as there are races and ethnicities or educational institutions to promote it as a justification for treating applicants differently on the basis of race or ethnicity. 

The Law School's preferences at issue in this case illustrate why it would be an extraordinary departure from modern equal protection analysis to recognize an interest in diversity as a compelling interest. The preferences rest on crude stereotypes: The Law School assumes that students are particularly likely to have experiences or perspectives important to the Law School's mission merely because of their membership in a particular racial or ethnic group. In this case, the stereotypes are applied to members of racial and ethnic groups that the Law School has identified as "historically discriminated against," which shows how indistinguishable such a preference can be from a remedy for the effects of societal discrimination. 

Although Justice Powell concluded in Bakke that an interest in diversity, as he defined it, was a compelling one that universities could pursue in considering race and ethnicity as a factor in admissions, no other Justice in Bakke concurred in his rationale. The Court's subsequent cases, while not directly addressing whether diversity is a compelling interest, have articulated standards on compelling-interest analysis. These standards logically and rightly exclude a nebulous interest in diversity, tied so closely to stereotypes and a remedy for societal discrimination, from qualifying as a compelling justification for racial preferences in university admissions. 

An interest in diversity is no more suitable for employment of narrowly-tailored measures than the interest of an educational institution in providing role models to minority school children or a state's interest in remedying the lingering effects of societal discrimination. The Court's  [*17]  precedents demonstrate that an interest is not a compelling justification for racial preferences merely because it is asserted to accomplish some good or achieve some benefit. Like the role model theory (which can certainly be assumed to provide educational benefits) or a remedy for the effects of general, societal discrimination, the interest in diversity is simply too indefinite, ill-defined, and lacking in objective, ascertainable standards to be fitted to narrowly-tailored measures. 

Even if the diversity interest could pass constitutional standards, the Law School's preferences could not possibly be considered narrowly tailored. They do not pass muster under the analysis employed by Justice Powell in Bakke or under the factors that this Court has considered important to the narrow-tailoring inquiry. The preferences, with their focus on enrolling "meaningful numbers" (or a "critical mass") of the specified minority students, amount to the functional equivalent of a quota. This is certainly so even if there is not a "fixed" number that the Law School seeks to enroll. The fact that the attainment or loss of "critical mass" can be measured with respect to numbers is a clear indication that a quota system is in use. Moreover, the enormous size of the preference is what creates the "two-track" or "dual" admissions system that enables the Law School to achieve its quota. It is a quota that cannot be said to be narrowly tailored to any objective other than achieving the kind of racial balance that the Law School desires. It is a quota that has no end in sight, unless this Court puts an end to it. 

The district court heard the evidence and made the findings that support the legal conclusions establishing the Law School's violations of the constitutional and statutory rights at issue. The court of appeals erred in reviewing the factual findings under a de novo standard, instead of the proper clearly-erroneous standard, and it reached the wrong legal conclusions in reversing the district court's conclusions of law. 

 [*18]  ARGUMENT
We have one fundamental contention which we will seek to develop in the course of this argument, and that contention is that no state has any authority under the equal protection clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to use race as a factor in affording educational opportunities among its citizens. n12


n12 Opening argument of Robert L. Carter, attorney for petitioners in Brown v. Board of Education, 347 U.S. 483 (1954) (December 9, 1952 oral argument), quoted in 49 LANDMARK BRIEFS AND ARGUMENTS OF THE SUPREME COURT 281 (Philip B. Kurland & Gerhard Casper eds. 1975). 

Fifty years after petitioners in another case addressed this Court with the foregoing argument, petitioner Barbara Grutter asks the Court to again vindicate the same principle. No value is more central to the principles of the Nation's founding n13 than the one that was incorporated into the Constitution through the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment, the "core purpose" of which is "to do away with all governmentally imposed discrimination based on race." Palmore v. Sidoti, 466 U.S. 429, 432 (1984). To be sure, the solemn promise of equality held out by the Fourteenth Amendment is one that has not always been honored. n14 But just as assuredly, there is today a  [*19]  consensus that the Nation's greatness can be measured in substantial part by the steps it has taken towards enforcing the promise of equality, while the most lamentable episodes and eras in our history are just so precisely because they mark denials of that promise. 

n13 See THE DECLARATION OF INDEPENDENCE (U.S. 1776) ("We hold these Truths to be self-evident--that all Men are created equal . . ."). See also Abraham Lincoln, letter dated April 6, 1859, in III THE COLLECTED WORKS OF ABRAHAM LINCOLN [hereinafter "COLLECTED WORKS"] 376 (Rutgers Univ. 1953) (referring to the principle of equality in the Declaration of Independence as "an abstract truth, applicable to all men and all times . . . to-day, and in all coming days . . . a rebuke and a stumbling-block to the very harbingers of re-appearing tyranny and oppression"). 

n14 See Abraham Lincoln, letter dated April 6, 1859, in III COLLECTED WORKS 375 ("The principles of Jefferson are the definitions and axioms of free society. And yet they are denied, and evaded, with no small show of success."). Abraham Lincoln, Seventh "Lincoln-Douglas" Debate, October 15, 1858, in III COLLECTED WORKS 301 (signers of Declaration of Independence "meant simply to declare the right, so that the enforcement of it might follow as fast as circumstances should permit. They meant to set up a standard maxim for society, which should be familiar to all; constantly looked to, constantly labored for, and even though never perfectly attained, constantly approximated, and therefore constantly spreading and deepening its influence, and augmenting the happiness and value of life to all people of all colors everywhere"). 

The Law School's use of race and ethnicity to classify and prefer individuals one over another based on those characteristics is a fundamental departure from the guarantee of governmental nondiscrimination. The justification put forth by the Law School for this unequal treatment is, moreover, not one based on ensuring equality through temporary measures taken to remedy past or present identified violations of the guarantee. Instead, the Law School stakes out as a reason to tolerate its racial preferences an expansive and indeterminate interest in student-body "diversity," for which the sine qua non is the consideration of race by itself as a reason for the different treatment of applicants in the admissions process. It is an interest with no temporal limits and with at least as many varied possibilities and standards of application as there are institutions to define it or racial and ethnic identities with which to achieve it. Its acceptance as a compelling interest would fundamentally and forever change the meaning of equality under the law in our Nation. 
  
I. The Law School's Use of Racial Preferences in Student Admissions Violates the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment, 42 U.S.C. § 2000d (Title VI), and 42 U.S.C. § 1981. 

A. The Law School's Racial Preferences Must be Subjected to "Strict Scrutiny." 

Because state-sponsored racial classifications are antithetical to the Fourteenth Amendment, all such classifications are "suspect" and must be subjected to  [*20]  "strict scrutiny." That is, the racial classification must be motivated by a "compelling governmental interest," and the means employed must be "narrowly tailored" to achieve that interest. City of Richmond v. J.A. Croson Co., 488 U.S. 469, 498-511 (1989). The Law School has a "heavy burden" of justification for its racial preferences. See Wygant v. Jackson Bd. of Educ., 476 U.S. 267, 282 n.10 (1986) (plurality opinion). The Court has held that the prohibitions of Title VI, 42 U.S.C. § 2000d, are coextensive with those of the Equal Protection Clause, see, e.g., Alexander v. Sandoval, 532 U.S. 275, 280-81 (2001), so the same strict-scrutiny analysis applies to those claims. 

It is now firmly established that the standard of review under the Constitution does not vary based on the race of the group benefited by the classification or on a determination that the classification at issue is "benign." Adarand Constructors, Inc. v. Pena, 515 U.S. 200, 224 (1995) ("Any person, of whatever race, has the right to demand that any governmental actor subject to the Constitution justify any racial classification subjecting that person to unequal treatment under the strictest judicial scrutiny."); J.A. Croson Co., 488 U.S. at 494 ("We thus reaffirm the view expressed by the plurality in Wygant that the standard of review under the Equal Protection Clause is not dependent on the race of those burdened or benefited by a particular classification.") (opinion of O'Connor, J., joined by Rehnquist, C.J., White and Kennedy, JJ.); id. at 520 (opinion of Scalia, J., concurring in the judgment). 

Accordingly, the Law School's explicit use of race as a factor in making student admissions decisions is constitutionally suspect. For the reasons discussed below, the Law School's racial preferences are neither supported by a compelling interest nor narrowly tailored to achieve such an interest and therefore violate the Fourteenth Amendment and Title VI. 

 [*21]  B. The Law School's Racial Preferences Are Not Supported by a Compelling Governmental Interest. 

1. The Law School's Racial Preferences Cannot Be Justified by Interests in "Academic Freedom" or "Diversity." 

a. This Court has thus far endorsed only one sufficiently compelling justification for racial classifications: remedying the effects of past or present identified discrimination. J.A. Croson Co., 488 U.S. at 493 ("Classifications based on race carry a danger of stigmatic harm. Unless they are strictly reserved for remedial settings, they may in fact promote notions of racial inferiority and lead to a politics of racial hostility.") (opinion of O'Connor, J., joined by Rehnquist, C.J., and White, Kennedy, JJ.); id. at 526 ("Nothing prevents [City of Richmond] from according a contracting preference to identified victims of discrimination.") (opinion of Scalia, J., concurring in the judgment). 

The Court has made explicit that there must be a "strong basis in the evidence for [the government's] conclusion that remedial action" is necessary. J.A. Croson Co., 488 U.S. at 510 (quoting Wygant, 476 U.S. at 277 (plurality opinion)). It has rejected as compelling asserted interests that are "too amorphous" and "ill-defined," and that are "essentially limitless in scope and duration," with "no logical stopping point." Id. at 497-98 (quoting Wygant, 476 U.S. at 275-76). 

The Law School does not justify its use of race as a factor in admissions on the basis of any past or present identified discrimination. To the contrary, it claims a long history of nondiscrimination: "The School, which has never excluded students on the grounds of race, admitted its first African American student . . . in 1868. . . . By 1894, the Law School had enrolled its first Mexican American students." App. 89. Instead, its only stated objective for the consideration of race is the achievement of "diversity" in  [*22]  the student body. It argues that such an interest is constitutionally legitimate based on the lone opinion of Justice Powell in Bakke, together with a separate opinion in that case authored by Justice Brennan, which was joined by Justices White, Marshall, and Blackmun. A review of the various opinions in Bakke reveals, however, that no Justice other than Justice Powell accepted diversity as a legitimate rationale for justifying racial classifications. 

In no case before or since Bakke has the Court held diversity to be a compelling interest sufficient to justify racial preferences. For the same or similar reasons that the Court has rejected other purposes as compelling, the diversity interest relied upon by the Law School is inherently unsuited to be a compelling interest. An interest in diversity is simply too indeterminate, open-ended, and unbounded by ascertainable standards. Its acceptance as a compelling interest would mark a sharp and lamentable departure from this Court's precedents by authorizing an interest that would--precisely because its attainment is not measured with respect to whether an identified "injury" has been "remedied"--become the Nation's first permanent justification for government-sponsored racial classifications. 

b. The University of California at Davis' "special admissions program" reserved 16% of the spaces in the entering medical school class for educationally or economically disadvantaged students from members of four specified racial minority groups: "Blacks," "Chicanos," "Asians," and "American Indians." Bakke, 438 U.S. at 275. The reserved spaces were available only to academically "qualified" students, and most minority applicants considered under the program were rejected. Id. at 288 n.26. The program was "flexible" insofar as there was no "floor" or "ceiling" on the total number of minority applicants to be admitted. Id. 

Five Justices, including Justice Powell, voted to strike down the Davis "special admissions program." Four of those Justices did not reach the constitutional issue, as they concluded that the admissions policy violated the  [*23]  prohibitions contained in 42 U.S.C. § 2000d (Title VI). Id. at 421 (opinion of Stevens, J., joined by Burger, C.J., Stewart, and Rehnquist, JJ.). Justice Powell concluded that the Davis program violated the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. Id. at 320 (opinion of Powell, J.). 

Another group of five Justices, also including Justice Powell, reversed the judgment of the California Supreme Court, which had enjoined Davis from using race as a factor in admissions under any circumstances. Id.; see also id. at 326 (opinion of Brennan, J., joined by White, Marshall, and Blackmun, JJ.). No common theory, though, explained why the injunction should be vacated. 

Justice Powell applied strict scrutiny in analyzing the Davis program. Id. at 290-91 (opinion of Powell, J.). He then considered four objectives offered by Davis in justification of the program. He rejected the first three as insufficient to justify the racial preferences. n15 Id. at 306-311. The fourth asserted objective--"attainment of a diverse student body"--is the one that Justice Powell did accept as constitutionally permissible. Id. at 311-12. Justice Powell's acceptance of the diversity interest as a compelling one was derived from his conclusions about the First Amendment right of "academic freedom" possessed by institutions of higher education, including the "freedom of a university to make its own judgments as to . . . the selection of its student body." Id. at 312. Justice Powell concluded that in arguing that universities had the right to "select those students who will contribute the most to the 'robust exchange of ideas,'" Davis had invoked a "countervailing constitutional interest, that of the First Amendment." Id. at 313 (quoting Keyishian v. Board of Regents, 385 U.S. 589, 603 (1967)). 

n15 These were (1) reducing the historic deficit of traditionally disfavored minorities in medical schools and in the medical profession; (2) countering the effects of societal discrimination; and (3) increasing the number of physicians who will practice in underserved communities. Bakke, 438 U.S. at 306 (opinion of Powell, J.). 

 [*24]  Justice Powell voted to invalidate the Davis program, despite his acceptance of diversity as a compelling state interest. In this portion of his opinion (Part V-A and Part V-B), he prescribes his framework for the proper consideration of race, including limitations on its use. Id. at 315-20. In seeking to define the diversity interest that he considered a compelling state interest, Justice Powell distinguished it from something else: "It is not an interest in simple ethnic diversity, in which a specified percentage of the student body is in effect guaranteed to be members of selected ethnic groups, with the remaining percentage an undifferentiated aggregation of students." Id. at 315. He concluded that the Davis program, "focused solely on ethnic diversity, would hinder rather than further attainment of genuine diversity." Id. at 315. Nor could it be saved by replacing the "two-track" system with even more tracks for additional categories of students. Id. 

Instead, Justice Powell pointed favorably to the example offered by the "Harvard College program," in which "the race of an applicant may tip the balance in his favor just as geographic origin or a life spent on the farm may tip the balance in other candidates' cases." Id. at 316 (quoting from description of Harvard College program contained in Brief Amicus Curiae of Harvard University, et al.). He described the Harvard admissions program as one in which "race or ethnic background may be deemed a 'plus' in a particular applicant's file, yet it does not insulate the individual from comparison with all other candidates for the available seats." Id. at 317. In the system envisioned by Justice Powell, qualifications among applicants would be "weighed fairly and competitively." Id. at 318. 

Justice Brennan and the Justices who joined his opinion in Bakke seemingly rejected "strict scrutiny" as the appropriate standard of review for considering the lawfulness of the Davis program. Id. at 357 (opinion of Brennan, J., joined by White, Marshall, and Blackmun, JJ.) (noting that "whites as a class [do not have] any of the 'traditional indicia of suspectness'"); id. at 357-58 (purposes of the Davis program do not stigmatize). Instead,  [*25]  they borrowed a scrutiny level from gender-discrimination cases that they characterized as "strict and searching." Id. at 362. Under this standard, "racial classifications designed to further remedial purposes 'must serve important governmental objectives and must be substantially related to achievement of those objectives.'" Id. at 359. 

Justice Brennan found that Davis' "articulated purpose of remedying the effects of past societal discrimination" was "sufficiently important to justify the use of race conscious admissions programs where there is a sound basis for concluding that minority underrepresentation is substantial and chronic, and that the handicap of past discrimination is impeding access of minorities to the medical school." Id. at 362. He also concluded that the means employed by Davis were appropriate:
  
The Davis admissions program does not simply equate minority status with disadvantage. Rather, Davis considers on an individual basis each applicant's personal history to determine whether he or she has likely been disadvantaged by racial discrimination. The record makes clear that only minority applicants likely to have been isolated from the mainstream of American life are considered in the special program; other minority applicants are eligible only through the regular admissions program. . . . Specific proof that a person has been victimized by discrimination is not a necessary predicate to offering him relief where the probability of victimization is great.
  
Id. at 377-78. See also id. at 275 n.4 (opinion of Powell, J.) (noting the admissions chairman would confirm "disadvantage" of individual applicants). 

In defending the Davis program against some of the arguments contained in Justice Powell's opinion, Justice Brennan also explained why there was no meaningful or constitutional difference between a program that "set aside a predetermined number of places for qualified minority applicants rather than using minority status as a positive factor to be considered in evaluating the applications of  [*26]  disadvantaged minority applicants." Id. at 378 (opinion of Brennan, J., joined by White, Marshall, and Blackmun, JJ.); id. ("There is no sensible, and certainly no constitutional, distinction between, for example, adding a set number of points to the admission rating of disadvantaged minority applicants as an expression of the preference with the expectation that this will result in the admission of an approximately determined number of qualified minority applicants and setting a fixed number of places for such applicants as was done here."). 

c. It is readily apparent from a review of the various opinions in Bakke that Justice Powell's articulation of the "academic freedom" or "diversity" interests as compelling state interests did not constitute a rationale for the holding of the Court. Among the five Justices who reached the constitutional question and reversed the state court injunction forbidding "any consideration" of race in the admissions process, id. at 320 (opinion of Powell, J.), only Justice Powell identified academic freedom and the achievement of diversity as purposes that could constitutionally justify the use of race as a factor in admissions. Justice Brennan and those Justices who joined his opinion (and who also wrote separate opinions) did not adopt or endorse the academic freedom or diversity rationales. Indeed, their only reference to the "Harvard program" discussed in Justice Powell's opinion is in a context that identifies only the very different remedial rationale approved in Justice Brennan's opinion: "We also agree with Mr. Justice Powell that a plan like the 'Harvard' plan . . . is constitutional under our approach, at least so long as the use of race to achieve an integrated student body is necessitated by the lingering effects of past discrimination." Id. at 326 n.1 (opinion of Brennan, J., joined by White, Marshall, and Blackmun, JJ.) (emphasis added). n16 

n16 The Sixth Circuit's reading of the quoted language to render it essentially meaningless, see Pet App. 18a-19a & n.8, is illogical and unpersuasive for the reasons stated in Judge Boggs' dissent. Id. at 100a n.6 (Boggs, J., dissenting). See also Johnson v. Board of Regents of Univ. of Georgia, 263 F.3d 1234, 1248 (11th Cir. 2001) (citing the same quoted language as indicating a remedial limitation on Justice Brennan's support of the "Harvard plan"). If Justice Brennan had wanted to endorse the "Harvard plan" touted by Justice Powell, he could have done so easily by ending the quoted sentence with the word "approach." 

 [*27]  Justice Brennan did seek to characterize the "central meaning" of the decisions in Bakke, but his synthesis of his opinion and Justice Powell's said nothing about "diversity":
  
Government may take race into account when it acts not to demean or insult any racial group, but to remedy disadvantages cast on minorities by past racial prejudice, at least when appropriate findings have been made by judicial, legislative, or administrative bodies with competence to act in this area.
  
Id. at 325 (emphasis added). Thus, whether or not viewed as having "implicitly rejected" Justice Powell's diversity rationale, Hopwood v. Texas, 78 F.3d 932, 944 (5th Cir.), cert. denied, 518 U.S. 1033 (1996), Justice Brennan's opinion contains no affirmative indication of support for the proposition that diversity is a compelling interest. See Pet. App. 100a-01a & n.6 (Boggs, J., dissenting); Johnson v. Board of Regents of Univ. of Georgia, 263 F.3d 1234, 1247-48 (11th Cir. 2001). 

In the lower courts, the Law School has repeatedly seized on the point that Part V-C of Justice Powell's opinion was joined by Justices Brennan, White, Marshall, and Blackmun. But Part V-C of Justice Powell's opinion says nothing about justifying racial preferences on grounds of diversity or academic freedom, or for that matter, on any ground. In stating that a constitutional admissions program must be "properly devised," Bakke, 438 U.S. at 320 (opinion of Powell, J.), this part of the opinion states a mere tautology; it avoids stating for what purposes a university may consider race in the admissions process. That unanswered question is, of course, a critical one because the government must have a compelling purpose to engage in any use of racial preferences. Moreover, the language in Part V-C about the "competitive consideration" of race is addressed only to means. If  [*28]  competitiveness were a sufficient basis for considering race in admissions, it could be so in a system designed to remedy the lingering effects of societal discrimination, to provide role models to minority students, or to meet an endless list of other objectives having nothing to do with diversity. Accordingly, this argument of the Law School is plainly incapable of demonstrating that Justice Powell's articulation of the academic freedom and diversity rationales constituted a rationale for the holding of the Court. 

The Sixth Circuit's determination, see Pet. App. 12a-17a, that diversity is a compelling interest on the basis of application of the analytical framework approved in Marks v. United States, 430 U.S. 188 (1977), is untenable. See Pet. App. 94a-108a (Boggs, J., dissenting) (rejecting on several grounds the majority's analysis under Marks); Johnson v. Board of Regents of Univ. of Georgia, 263 F.3d at 1247-49 (also rejecting argument that Justice Powell's diversity rationale is narrower than Justice Brennan's, and therefore controlling under Marks). The characterization of Justice Powell's "strict scrutiny" standard of review as "narrower" than the "intermediate" standard approved by Justice Brennan, id. at 15a-16a, answers nothing about the purposes for which race may be considered in admissions; an invalid purpose will not survive review even under the lesser standard of review. See Pet. App. 97a-98a (Boggs, J., dissenting). 

All the members of this Court have acknowledged the fractured nature of the Bakke opinions. See Adarand Constructors, Inc. v. Pena, 515 U.S. 200, 218 (1995) ("Bakke did not produce an opinion for the Court."); Alexander v. Sandoval, 532 U.S. 275, 308 n.15 (2001) (Stevens, J., dissenting, joined by Souter, Breyer, and Ginsburg, JJ.). Ultimately, given the very different nature of the diversity and remedial rationales and the disagreement and division in the lower courts as to how to interpret the conflicting opinions, what the Court said in another case concerning Marks is just as true here:
  
We think it not useful to pursue the Marks inquiry to the utmost logical possibility when it has so obviously baffled and divided the lower courts  [*29]  that have considered it. This degree of confusion following a splintered decision . . . is itself a reason for reexamining that decision.
  
Nichols v. United States, 511 U.S. 738, 745-46 (1994) (discussing Court's prior decision and various opinions in Baldasar v. Illinois, 446 U.S. 222 (1980)). 

d. The Sixth Circuit's majority opinion upheld diversity as a compelling interest solely based on its determination that it was "bound" by Justice Powell's opinion with respect to that issue. Pet. App. 17a. But because the opinions in Bakke leave unanswered the question of whether interests in academic freedom or diversity are compelling state interests justifying racial preferences in admissions, resolution of the issue must lie elsewhere. The Court has not before or since Bakke directly addressed whether these interests are compelling. But the Court's precedents have established a helpful framework within which to judge whether any interest is sufficiently compelling to support the use of racial classifications. These cases and the modes of analyses they develop demonstrate that the interests asserted by the Law School in support of its racial preferences are not compelling grounds for departing from the Constitution's guarantee against governmental discrimination on the invidious basis of race and ethnicity. 

Although Justice Powell derived his lone analysis for the compelling nature of diversity from First Amendment principles, the Court has never recognized academic freedom specifically, or First Amendment principles generally, as justifications for government-sponsored race discrimination. The Court has declined to find a "right" to practice race discrimination based in the First Amendment. In Runyon v. McCrary, 427 U.S. 160 (1976), a private school that promoted the desirability of racial segregation asserted parental First Amendment rights of freedom of association to justify the school's racially discriminatory admissions practices. Holding that the school had violated one of the same federal civil rights statutes at issue in this case, 42 U.S.C. § 1981, the Court  [*30]  rejected the argument that the school had a First Amendment right to discriminate. Runyon, 427 U.S. at 176 (noting that although "parents have a First Amendment right to send their children to educational institutions that promote the belief that racial segregation is desirable, . . . it does not follow that the practice of excluding racial minorities from such institutions is also protected by the same principle"). 

It would be a surprising and anomalous turn of events if practices of private parties which are not protected by the First Amendment are now to be permitted on First Amendment grounds to state actors, to which the Fourteenth Amendment's powerful command of nondiscrimination is expressly directed. Such a distinction cannot plausibly be based on a difference in kind of First Amendment rights asserted. Whatever status "academic freedom" has under the First Amendment, neither the Court's precedents nor history supports a conclusion that it is a right with greater or more paramount scope than other First Amendment rights. 

Unhinged from any purported constitutional foundation, the Law School's assertion that diversity is a compelling state interest falls away readily in light of the Court's other precedents. This becomes apparent by comparing the Law School's articulated diversity interest to the one interest that the Court has held to be compelling--remedying past or present identified statutory or constitutional violations of the guarantee of equality. The nature of the two interests is very different, and these differences prove decisively the wisdom of rejecting diversity as a compelling interest. A remedy for identified instances of discrimination is inextricably tethered to the purposes of the nondiscrimination guarantee; it seeks to repair the injury and restore the promise of equality broken by the effects of the violation. In its invocation and use, the "deviation from the norm of equal treatment of all racial and ethnic groups is a temporary matter, a measure taken in the service of the goal of equality itself." J.A. Croson Co., 488 U.S. at 510. Precisely because such an interest is based on injury to the equality principle, identified with specificity, this kind of  [*31]  remedial interest is one suited to withstanding "the detailed judicial inquiry" to which all racial classifications must be subjected. Adarand Constructors, Inc., 515 U.S. at 227. Such a clearly identified remedial goal permits guidance in determining the "precise scope of the injury" and the "extent of the remedy necessary to cure its effects." J.A. Croson Co., 488 U.S. at 498, 510. Absent these attributes, an interest could be used to "justify a preference of any size or duration." Id. at 505. Without adherence to these standards, moreover, there is a "danger" that racial classifications will be "merely the product of unthinking stereotypes or a form of racial politics." Id. at 510. 

An interest could hardly be less suited to the standards laid down by the Court than the diversity interest articulated by the Law School. The concept of "diversity" is itself notoriously ill-defined, n17 and the Law School's defense in this case only illustrates the point. It defines the diversity that it seeks as enrollment of a "critical mass" of students from racial and ethnic groups that have been "historically discriminated against," including the groups specified in the Policy. App. 120. The "mass" reaches the stage of "critical" when it produces the educational benefits claimed by the Law School to flow from it. The point at which this "critical mass" is reached can best be described as a matter for mystical and metaphysical inquiry. On the one hand, the Law School vehemently denies that "critical mass" can be defined with reference to a number or range of numbers of enrolled students, while on the other hand it contends that "critical mass" means the same thing as "meaningful numbers" of enrolled students from the specified racial and ethnic minority groups. Id.; Pet. Opp. 3. A rare point of clarity, though, is that however defined, the Law  [*32]  School claims for itself and other educational institutions the unique ability (and hence the right) to determine which particular racial and ethnic minorities are necessary for achievement of "critical mass," and at what point that "critical mass" is reached. The complete absence of objective, ascertainable standards means that "critical mass," i.e., "diversity," can mean as many different things as there are racial and ethnic groups and institutions of higher education in this country. 

n17 See, e.g., Lutheran Church-Missouri Synod v. FCC, 141 F.3d 344, 356 (D.C. Cir. 1998) (noting "just how much burden the term 'diversity' has been asked to bear in the latter part of the 20th century in the United States"; "it appears to have been coined both as a permanent justification for policies seeking racial proportionality in all walks of life ('affirmative action' has only a temporary remedial connotation) and as a synonym for proportional representation itself"). 

The Law School has chosen its preferred groups on the basis that they have been "historically discriminated against." App. 120. If recognized as a compelling interest, the diversity that another school pursues might well be based on some other reason for the racial or ethnic classifications, or on a different identification of "historically discriminated against" groups. To recognize such a basis as sufficient for justifying racial classifications would "open the door to competing claims" for "every disadvantaged group." J.A. Croson Co., 488 U.S. at 505; id. at 511 ("Our history will adequately support a legislative preference for almost any ethnic, religious, or racial group with the political strength to negotiate 'a piece of the action' for its members.") (quoting Fullilove v. Klutznick, 448 U.S. 448, 539 (1980) (Stevens, J., dissenting)). The Law School's commitment with "special reference," App. 120, to members from the "historically discriminated against" groups also shows how transparently the diversity interest can substitute for one based on remedying the effects of societal discrimination. 

To hold that diversity constitutes a compelling interest justifying racial preferences would bring to pass something in the higher education community similar to what Justice Powell warned of generally with respect to preferences designed to remedy societal discrimination. It would "convert a remedy heretofore reserved for violations of legal rights into a privilege" that all educational institutions "throughout the Nation could grant at their pleasure to whatever groups are perceived" to contribute to the diversity of the student body. Bakke, 438 U.S. at 310 (opinion of Powell, J.). It will have "loosed a potentially  [*33]  far-reaching principle disturbingly at odds with our traditional equal protection doctrine." Metro Broadcasting, Inc. v. FCC, 497 U.S. 547, 613 (1990) (O'Connor, J., dissenting). See also Pet. App. 128a-29a (Boggs, J., dissenting) ("There is no limiting principle preventing the Law School from employing ethnic or religious preferences to arrange its student body by critical mass. In short, the compelling state interest of developing a diverse student body would justify an infinite amount of engineering with respect to every racial, ethnic, and religious class."). 

Accordingly, an interest in diversity is as "ill-defined" and "amorphous" as a goal of remedying societal discrimination or providing role models to minority children. J.A. Croson Co., 488 U.S. at 498; id. at 497 (opinion of O'Connor, J.) (quoting Wygant, 476 U.S. at 276 (plurality opinion)). Having "no relation to some basis for believing a constitutional or statutory violation has occurred," the diversity rationale could be used to justify race-based decisionmaking "essentially limitless in scope and duration." Id. Because the nature of the interest is one in which success in achieving it is measured not by remedying past identified injury, but instead by ensuring against "under-representation" going forward, it is an interest that could justify preferences "timeless in their ability to affect the future." Wygant, 476 U.S. at 276 (plurality opinion). Its adoption as a compelling interest would give the Nation its first permanent justification for racial preferences, and one that is indistinguishable from simple racial balancing. 

e. Judge Clay's concurring opinion cited to empirical evidence in support of its conclusion that diversity was a compelling interest. Pet. App. 54a-63a. As an initial matter, the district court did not try the issue of whether diversity was a compelling interest because it concluded that the issue was one of law (as the parties also contended). The principal evidence relied upon by the concurrence is the report of the Law School's expert witness, Patricia Gurin, who did not testify at trial; her report was received by the Court only in the course of motions for summary judgment. There are many reasons why Gurin's report and opinions are wholly deficient to support a  [*34]  conclusion that diversity is a compelling interest. These reasons were argued to the district court, and a number of them are explained in Judge Boggs' dissenting opinion. Pet. App. 146a-49a (Boggs, J., dissenting). Among other things, Gurin's studies did not measure how much diversity is required to yield the claimed educational benefits, or what marginal benefits accrue from relative levels of diversity. Id. at 147a-49a. Astoundingly, Gurin did not even attempt to correlate the racial and ethnic diversity with the claimed educational benefits. Id. at 148a. The study is indeed one with "profound empirical and methodological defects." Id. at 147a. 

Moreover, whether diversity actually produces educational benefits is a question entirely distinct from whether it is a compelling interest sufficient to support racial preferences in admissions. Few would gainsay that remedying the lingering effects of societal discrimination or providing role models to school children would produce positive benefits. Indeed, the role model theory in particular is designed to produce educational benefits for children. But as important and valuable as those interests are, they cannot be, for reasons explained by the Court, compelling interests justifying state-sponsored racial preferences. Because similar reasoning applies to the amorphous, boundless diversity rationale, it is a non sequitur for the Law School to argue that mere evidence of some educational benefit makes the interest a compelling one. 

Moreover, if strict scrutiny is to have meaning, it should be incumbent on the Law School to demonstrate that it has a "strong basis in evidence," J.A. Croson Co., 488 U.S. at 510 (quoting Wygant, 476 U.S. at 277 (plurality opinion)), for concluding that racial preferences are necessary to achieve the interest considered compelling. At a minimum, this should mean that there is a firm basis for concluding that the "marginal benefits gained from employing the racial classification over the next efficacious race-neutral alternative are themselves compelling." Pet. App. 153a (Boggs, J., dissenting). It should also require a demonstration that the benefits produced substantially outweigh the harms that racial preferences necessarily  [*35]  entail, including the fostering of stereotypes, stigma, and injury to the personal rights of innocent individuals displaced by the preferences. The Law School has not attempted, much less succeeded, in making such showings. 

2. The Interests Proffered by the Intervenors Cannot Justify the Law School's Racial Preferences. 

The intervenors have sought to justify the Law School's racial preferences on the additional grounds that they are necessary to achieve "integration" in higher education and to "offset" what the intervenors perceive to be racial bias and discrimination in academic criteria, particularly grades and standardized test scores. Pet. Res. 23-30. Although the court of appeals' majority found it unnecessary to address these arguments because of its holding with respect to the diversity rationale, they should be rejected for the reasons contained in the district court's opinion. See Pet. App. 257a-92a. 

A sufficient reason for dismissing the intervenors' contentions is that the district court correctly found that the Law School indisputably was not motivated by the intervenors' asserted interests in adopting the racial preferences. Id. at 292a. Accordingly, under settled precedents of this Court, the intervenors' proposed interests cannot constitute compelling interests justifying racial preferences. See, e.g., Shaw v. Hunt, 517 U.S. 899, 908 n.4 (1996). Cf. Mississippi Univ. for Women v. Hogan, 458 U.S. 718, 730 & n.16 (1982) (gender discrimination); United States v. Virginia, 518 U.S. 515, 535-36 (1996) (gender discrimination). 

On their merits, intervenors' proposed justifications are at war with the Court's precedents. They are thinly disguised (or undisguised) substitutes for rationales based on remedying the lingering effects of societal discrimination. Thus, the intervenors' characterization of an interest in "integration" should not be confused with an interest in remedying the effects of identified, intentional discrimination, of which there is no evidence in this case. Intervenors  [*36]  submitted no evidence that the Law School used grades or test scores, for example, because of their adverse effect on minorities or in any other way intentionally discriminated against minorities. Personnel Administrator of Massachusetts v. Feeney, 442 U.S. 256, 272 (1979) (rules or practices with disproportionate impact are unconstitutional only if they can be traced to an unconstitutional purpose). 

It is such discrimination, and not the use of any criteria with a disparate impact, that constitutes past, identified discrimination, the lingering effects of which can be remedied in extreme cases with the judicious use of a racial preference. J.A. Croson Co., 488 U.S. at 509 (opinion of O'Connor, J.) ("In the extreme case, some form of narrowly tailored racial preference might be necessary to break down patterns of deliberate exclusion."); People Who Care v. Rockford Bd. of Educ., 111 F.3d 528, 534 (7th Cir. 1997) (Posner, J.) (provision calling for certain percentage of hired teachers to be black or Hispanic could not be justified by statistical disparities or underrepresentation; "there is no finding that the school district has ever discriminated (by which we mean discriminated intentionally--the only kind of discrimination that violates the equal protection clause)"). In fact, intervenors' goal is nothing more than the promotion of outright racial balancing, which the Court has not countenanced. See, e.g., Freeman v. Pitts, 503 U.S. 467, 494 (1992) ("Racial balance is not to be achieved for its own sake. It is to be pursued when racial imbalance has been caused by a constitutional violation.") (emphasis added). See also J.A. Croson Co., 488 U.S. at 507 (rejecting a means tied to "outright racial balancing"). 

C. The Law School's Preferences Are Not Narrowly Tailored. 

Because an interest in diversity is inherently unsuited to "narrowly-tailored" means, it should hardly be surprising that the Law School's racial preferences, which it justifies solely on diversity grounds, are anything but  [*37]  narrowly tailored. Even, however, if one operates from Justice Powell's premises about the viability of a "compelling" status for the diversity interest, the Law School's blunt use of race cannot remotely be considered narrowly tailored. This can be seen first by viewing the Law School's preferences in light of the opinions in Bakke, and second by considering the Law School's preferences under the traditional principles the Court has approved for narrow-tailoring analysis. 

1.a. The race-based admissions program struck down in Bakke was at least limited to granting a preference to applicants who were also "economically and/or educationally disadvantaged." Bakke, 438 U.S. at 274-75 & n.6 (opinion of Powell, J.). The Davis program, moreover, did not "simply equate minority status with disadvantage." Id. at 374 & n.58 (opinion of Brennan, J., joined by White, Marshall, and Blackmun, JJ.). See also discussion supra at 25. The Law School's racial preferences, however, are not even facially restricted to those individuals who demonstrate disadvantage of any kind, whether or not arising from discrimination. Because "race matters" in the judgment of the Law School, race by itself is a sufficient basis for a student to receive a preference if one belongs to a race that has been "historically discriminated against." n18 See Pet. Opp. 3. To the Law School, at least, it is "obvious. that 'students from groups which have been historically discriminated against' have experiences that are integral to this mission, regardless of whether they are rich or poor or 'victims' of discrimination." Id. (quoting Law School Policy, App. 120) (emphasis added). This is a stark use of race, more so than was employed by the program that was struck down in Bakke. Indeed, the Law School's preferences do not pass muster under any of the rationales articulated in the various Bakke opinions. The irrelevance of individual disadvantage due to discrimination in the  [*38]  Law School's award of preferences is incompatible with the remedial interest approved in Justice Brennan's opinion. The unalloyed racial and ethnic character of the preferences is also equivalent to "preferring members of any one group for no other reason than race or ethnic origin" which Justice Powell condemned as "discrimination for its own sake." Bakke, 438 U.S. at 307 (opinion of Powell, J.). 

n18 This point was illustrated by the admission of the Law School's counsel during oral argument in the Sixth Circuit that Ms. Grutter probably would have been admitted had she only been African American. Pet. App. 87a. 

The way in which the Law School defines its interest in diversity proves how it is tied to crude stereotypes. It deems that mere membership in one of the specified racial or ethnic groups will make it "particularly likely" that students will have had "experiences and perspectives of special importance" to the Law School's "mission." App. 120. Thus, the Law School "impermissibly values individuals because [it] presume[s] that persons think in a manner associated with their race." Metro Broadcasting, Inc., 497 U.S. at 618 (O'Connor, J., dissenting). The "corollary to this notion is plain: Individuals of unfavored racial and ethnic backgrounds are unlikely to possess the unique experiences and background that contribute to viewpoint diversity." Id. at 619. 

b. In no meaningful sense can the Law School be said to "weigh fairly and competitively" the consideration of race and ethnicity in the admissions process. Bakke, 438 U.S. at 318 (opinion of Powell, J.). Applicants from the disfavored races certainly do not compete on the "same footing" as applicants from the preferred racial and ethnic groups. Id. at 317; Pet. App. 133a-34a (Boggs, J., dissenting) ("Far from receiving 'competitive consideration,' majority applicants are all but summarily rejected with credentials, but not ethnicity, identical to their under-represented minority 'competitors' who are virtually guaranteed admission."). These failings in the Law School's preferences are fatal under Justice Powell's analysis and are shown with abundance in the trial record. The court of appeals, however, did not evaluate the district court's findings and the statistical evidence on the size of the racial preference. 

The Law School's own admissions data and witnesses demonstrate the "staggering magnitude" of its racial  [*39]  preferences. Id. at 89a (Boggs, J., dissenting). Formal statistical evidence, such as that provided by Professor Larntz, is helpful. But the importance of race and ethnicity in the admissions process can be grasped with a glance at comparisons of admissions outcomes across racial lines for students applying with comparable undergraduate grades and LSAT scores. The "grids," such as those produced by the Law School itself in 1995, which Dr. Larntz replicated for all the years at issue, paint a devastating picture. See discussion supra at 5-7; App. 127-203. In cell after cell, and year after year, one can actually "see" the colossal importance of race in admissions decisionmaking. The usefulness of gauging the size of the preference by looking to the grids was admitted by respondent and former Law School Admissions Dean, Dennis Shields. He was asked, for example, about the 1995 grids comparing African American to Caucasian applicants:
  
Q. Would it be fair to assume . . . the average here, the difference in terms of decisionmaking with respect to African Americans in these cells and Caucasians can generally be explained by the extent to which race is taken into account in the admissions process? 
  
A. Generally, yes.
  
Record 334, 4 Tr. 213-15. The same inference can be drawn from a review of the grids for all years, which demonstrates that disadvantage on the basis of race works not only against Caucasian Americans, but also against other groups, including minority groups historically discriminated against, especially Asian Americans. The massive size of the preference can also be observed by comparing median grade point averages and test scores across racial and ethnic lines, Pet. App. 312a-11a; the probability rates of admission as a function of race and "selection index," see discussion supra at 8; Pet. App. 312a-19a; and the often astronomically different relative odds of admission among the different races and ethnicities when controlling for grades, test scores, plus other factors. See discussion supra at 8-10. See also Pet. App. 131a-40a (Boggs, J., dissenting) (discussing the "magnitude" of the Law School's racial  [*40]  preferences). Statistical evidence serves a useful purpose in discrimination cases. See, e.g., International Bhd. of Teamsters v. United States, 431 U.S. 324, 339 (1977). The statistical evidence presented in this case is certainly sufficient under the case law to support the district court's finding of discrimination. See, e.g., id.; Castaneda v. Partida, 430 U.S. 482, 496 n.17 (1977). 

The grids and statistics merely confirm that the Law School has implemented its written admissions policy of placing great importance on grades and test scores generally, while pursuing a "commitment to racial and ethnic diversity" that entails admitting students from the specified racial and ethnic minority groups whose grades and test scores ("selection index") are "relatively far" from those of the "overwhelming bulk of students admitted." App. 115-16, 118. It is a commitment to a race-based double standard in admissions. The point was made effectively by Dean Shields:
  
Q. And in order to achieve that critical mass of minority students the practice was and the policy called for, a willingness to admit minority students from generally lower academic qualifications [than] majority students, isn't that a fair statement? 
  
A. I think that's a fair statement.
  
Record 334, 4 Tr. 206. See also Pet. App. 135a (Boggs, J., dissenting) (Law School's "two steep cliffs in the admissions rate, one for under-represented minority applicants and one for majority applicants, demonstrate that the Law School maintains a 'two-track,' indeed separated, system for admissions.") id. at 173a-74a (Gilman, J., dissenting) ("I believe that the Law School's pursuit of a critical mass of minority students has led to the creation of a two-track admissions system, not only in the sense that a minimum percentage of seats is set aside for under-represented minorities, but also because the Law School gives grossly disproportionate weight to race and ethnicity in order to achieve this critical mass."). 

c. The Law School's "critical mass," a concept it reserves for students from the "historically discriminated  [*41]  against" racial and ethnic groups is, as the district court found, "practically indistinguishable from a quota system." Id. at 248a-49a. The fact that it does not set aside each year a "fixed" number of spaces in the class does not make it any less a quota-based system. Pet. App. 130a (Boggs, J., dissenting) ("For the majority, the inquiry into narrow tailoring begins and ends with a determination that the Law School neither 'sets aside' an exact number of seats for racial or ethnic minorities nor admits minorities with a specific quota of admittees in mind."). Justice Powell made clear that a university could not constitutionally maintain the "functional equivalent of a quota." Bakke, 438 U.S. at 318 (opinion of Powell, J.). As Judge Boggs noted, the fact that the quota is a "range rather than one specific number certainly does not insulate a program from constitutional scrutiny," and it is implausible that the Davis program would have survived if only it had reserved a range of seats rather than a specified number. Pet. App. 143a (Boggs, J., dissenting). See also DeFunis v. Odegaard, 416 U.S. 312, 332-33 (1974) (Douglas, J., dissenting) (where law school had target of 15% to 20% minority applicants, "without becoming embroiled in a semantic debate over whether this practice constitutes a 'quota,' it is clear that, given the limitation on the total number of applicants that could be accepted, this policy did reduce the total number of places for which DeFunis could compete--solely on account of his race"). 

Here, the district court found that the Law School's conception of "critical mass" was to ensure enrollment of a minimum of 10-12% of the class from the specified minority groups, with a range of enrollment between 10-17%. Pet. App. 225a, 248a. The finding has ample support in the record. First, although evasive, the Law School does acknowledge that "critical mass" means the same thing as "meaningful numbers" of students from the preferred minority groups. It reports that it has been able to achieve critical mass with its Policy, so that by looking at the admissions data, one can observe what numbers define critical mass. Even with some variations, the numbers demonstrate a remarkable stability, at least as stable as  [*42]  the numbers for enrollment of all students across the years. Pet. App. 141a-44a (Boggs, J., dissenting). The range as shown by the data is also consistent with the testimony of the chairman of the committee that adopted the Policy, who defined critical mass as a range between 11-17%. See discussion supra at 4-5. The district court's findings on the issue certainly cannot be said to be clearly erroneous. See Pet. App. 144a (Boggs, J., dissenting) ("The combination of the Law School's thinly veiled references to such a target, its 'critical mass,' and relatively consistent results in achieving a particular enrollment percentage, should convince us that the Law School's admissions scheme is functionally, and even nominally, indistinguishable from a quota system."); id. at 173a (Gilman, J., dissenting) (noting that "the 'critical mass' of minority students that [the Law School] seeks to enroll is functionally indistinguishable from a quota"). 

2. The traditional factors cited by this Court for conducting a narrow-tailoring analysis yield the same conclusion that the Law School's racial preferences cannot plausibly be considered to pass the test. See, e.g., United States v. Paradise, 480 U.S. 149, 183, 185 (1987). First, the preference regime is, as noted above, inherently a permanent one; the Law School has placed no durational limits on its use of the preferences. Pet. App. 247a-48a. This conflicts with the importance that the Court has placed on the temporary nature of such preferences. See, e.g., Adarand Constructors, Inc., 515 U.S. at 238; J.A. Croson Co., 488 U.S. at 510. Indeed, in the intervening years since Bakke was decided, it has become abundantly clear that a program of racial and ethnic preferences designed to achieve "diversity" certainly does not contain "the seed of its own termination." Metro Broadcasting, Inc. v. FCC, 497 U.S. 547, 595 (1990). The preferences, like the interest on which they are founded, are "permanent and ongoing" and live on "perpetually." Gratz v. Bollinger, 122 F. Supp. 2d 811, 823-24 (E.D. Mich. 2000), cert. granted, 123 U.S. 602 (2002). 

Second, the relationship of means to ends is a poor one if the Law School's genuine interest is either intellectual  [*43]  or even racial and ethnic diversity. As the district court noted, "there is no logical basis" for the Law School's choice of the "particular racial groups which receive special attention under the current admissions policy." Pet. App. 249a. Thus, the preferences extend to Puerto Ricans born on the United States mainland, but not those born in Puerto Rico. Id. at 249a-50a. The Law School's bulletin singles out Mexican Americans rather than other Hispanics as receiving "special attention" in the admissions process, and the admissions data confirms the differences in treatment for those two groups. Id. Caucasian Americans and Asian Americans are treated as undifferentiated masses, receiving no preference for race or ethnicity, even though one could easily identify dozens of separate racial or ethnic groups contained in those broad categories. The Law School's daily tracking of the race and ethnicity of its applicants entirely omits many racial and ethnic groups, including, for example, Arab Americans, who receive no preferential treatment. Pet. App. 250a; Record 346, Tr.Exhs. 10-12, Cir. App. 4605-46. 

It is no answer to the haphazard manner of conferring preferences that the Law School has singled out groups that have been "historically discriminated against." App. 120. The preferences are both overinclusive and underinclusive, and hence there is no close "fit" of means to ends. J.A. Croson Co., 488 U.S. at 493 (opinion of O'Connor, J.). As discussed above, see supra at 37-38, the preferences to the specified groups are given without regard to whether a student is "rich" or "poor" or the victim of discrimination. Pet. Opp. 3. At the same time, students who have actually been subject to discrimination, but who belong to racial and ethnic groups not preferred by the Law School, receive no preference for their race or ethnicity. Pet. App. 250a. The preferences are also the product of impermissible stereotyping, since the Law School simply assumes (indeed, believes it to be "obvious," Pet. Opp. 3) that membership in a particular racial or ethnic group will make it likely that a student will bring with him or her the experiences that the Law School associates with that group and that it considers "essential to its mission." App. 120. "The  [*44]  chosen means, resting as they do on stereotyping and so indirectly furthering the asserted end, could not plausibly be deemed narrowly tailored." Metro Broadcasting, Inc., 497 U.S. at 617 (opinion of O'Connor, J., dissenting). 

Third, the Law School's quota, or "critical mass," is one that "cannot be said to be narrowly tailored to any goal, except perhaps outright racial balancing." J.A. Croson Co., 488 U.S. at 507; Pet. App. 151a (Boggs, J., dissenting) (noting that "some measure of rough proportionality inevitably creeps in as the measure of what is the 'critical mass'"). This follows from the arbitrariness both of the choice of minority groups for inclusion and the numerical range shown to represent what the Law School means by "meaningful numbers." 

Finally, less restrictive means are surely available to achieve the kind of educational benefits that the Law School associates with racial and ethnic diversity, including race-neutral alternatives. If the outlooks and experiences of students from the designated minority groups are indeed what the Law School seeks to bring to the learning process, then the logical and narrowly-tailored means of achieving the end would be to actually look for such "academic" or "experiential" diversity in the admissions process, rather than using race and ethnicity as a proxy. Pet. App. 155a-56a (Boggs, J., dissenting) (noting that "it is more likely that the Law School's preference for certain races is an interest in race itself") (emphasis in original). Instead, as the district court correctly found, the Law School failed to consider race-neutral alternatives prior to implementing its racial preferences, and this failure "militates against a finding of narrow tailoring." Pet. App. 251a. See also J.A. Croson Co., 488 U.S. at 507. 

D. The Law School's Preferences Violate 42 U.S.C. § 1981. 

Petitioner's proof that the Law School has engaged in intentional discrimination also establishes a violation of 42 U.S.C. § 1981. See General Bldg. Contractors Ass'n v. Pennsylvania, 458 U.S. 375, 383-91 (1982). Although its  [*45]  text, written in the aftermath of the Civil War, suggests that only non-whites are its intended beneficiaries, the Court has held that the statute prohibits discrimination against whites to the same extent as others. See McDonald v. Santa Fe Trail Transp. Co., 427 U.S. 273, 295-96 (1976). Under § 1981(c), the statute's substantive rights are protected from impairment under color of state authority. 

A contract for educational services is a "contract" for purposes of § 1981. Runyon v. McCrary, 427 U.S. 160, 172 (1976). The racial discrimination practiced by the Law School in admissions is a "classic violation of § 1981." Id. The Law School does not offer admission on an "equal basis" to members of all races. Id. On the contrary, as the district court found and the foregoing discussion elaborates, the Law School applies different standards in admission based on race and ethnicity. 

Section 1981 contains no exceptions to its rule of nondiscrimination. It does not provide, for example, that claimed interests in "diversity" or "academic freedom" excuse unequal treatment on the basis of race under the statute. Indeed, the Court has specifically rejected a number of asserted defenses to the statute based on the exercise of constitutional rights. Id. at 175-79 (rejecting defenses based on the First Amendment rights of freedom of association, parental rights under the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment, and the right of privacy). See also discussion supra at 29-30. 
  
II. The Court of Appeals Should Have Reviewed and Affirmed the District Court's Findings Under the "Clearly Erroneous" Standard of Review and Should Not Have Reviewed the Findings De Novo. 

The Sixth Circuit reviewed all findings of fact of the lower court de novo. Pet. App. 9a. Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 52(a) provides, however, that "findings of fact shall not be set aside unless clearly erroneous." Under this standard, the court of appeals' review should be limited to  [*46]  determining whether there were "two permissible views of the evidence," in which case "the factfinder's choice between them cannot be clearly erroneous." Hernandez v. New York, 500 U.S. 352, 369 (1991) (quoting Anderson v. City of Bessemer, 470 U.S. 564, 574 (1985)). It is extraordinary that the court of appeals disregarded this rule and substituted its fact findings for those of the district court. It did so with little explanation, simply citing to two of its own precedents for the proposition that the "appellate court should conduct an independent review of the record when constitutional facts are at issue." Pet. App. 9a (citing Women's Med. Prof'l Corp. v. Voinovich, 130 F.3d 187, 192 (6th Cir. 1997), and Johnson v. Economic Dev. Corp., 241 F.3d 501, 509 (6th Cir. 2001)). 

The Sixth Circuit's proposition appears to be drawn from a line of First Amendment defamation cases, beginning with Bose Corp. v. Consumers Union of United States, Inc., 466 U.S. 485 (1984). Those cases "turn on the Court's determination that findings of voluntariness or actual malice involve legal, as well as factual, elements." Hernandez, 500 U.S. at 367. They have "no relevance" to a case such as this one, involving claims of discrimination. Id. (rejecting argument that Bose and its progeny should be applied to alter the clearly-erroneous standard of review for claims of equal protection violations). Indeed, the Court has consistently held that the clearly-erroneous standard applies to review of findings of discrimination. See, e.g., Anderson v. City of Bessemer, 470 U.S. 564, 578 (1985); Pullman-Standard v. Swint, 456 U.S. 273, 286-291 (1982). 

The important findings of the district court rejected by the court of appeals in the wake of its improper de novo review cannot be characterized as essentially legal. First, the district court found that the Law School "effectively reserved" approximately 10% of each class for students from the "underrepresented" minority groups. Pet. App. 249a. See also id. at 248a (finding Law School has an "unwritten policy" of having 10-12% of each class composed of students from the "under-represented" minority groups). The finding was amply supported by the record,  [*47]  including the fact that the proportion of underrepresented minorities never dipped below 10% during the years in question, see Id. at 207a-08a, the testimony of Law School witnesses to the effect that 10% constituted a "critical mass" of the specified groups, see, e.g., id., and the undisputed existence of an earlier policy that specifically had a 10-12% goal, see id. at 225a. Given this evidence, it was surely within the province of the trier of fact to disbelieve the Law School witnesses who suggested that the quota had been abandoned with the implementation of the 1992 Policy. 

Second, the question whether the Law School had considered race-neutral alternatives is also a factual inquiry. The district court found that it had failed to do so. Id. at 251a. Here, the district court relied upon the fact that the Law School failed to produce any witness involved with the promulgation of the 1992 Policy, or its subsequent administration, to describe the actual consideration of race-neutral alternatives. Id. It was certainly within the province of the trier of fact to determine that the insistence of the Law School's witnesses at trial on the necessity of using race was not the same thing as actual consideration at the time of the Policy's adoption, or during its implementation, of race-neutral alternatives. 

Third, a determination of which racial or ethnic groups receive a preference is entirely a factual inquiry. The district court found that the Law School had provided a preference for Puerto Ricans raised on the United States mainland, but not those raised in Puerto Rico, and to Mexican Americans, but not other Hispanics, and that it had offered "no satisfactory explanation" for these distinctions. Id. at 250a. The district court had extensive evidence from which to draw this conclusion, including (1) the Law School's own Bulletins, see Pet. App. at 200a-202a, App. 74, 84, which specifically identify Mexican Americans and Puerto Ricans born on the United States mainland (but not other Hispanics) as groups "encouraged" to apply, (2) the Law School's grids, see App. 127-55, which distinguished between "Mexican Americans" and "Other Hispanics," and (3) Professor Larntz's testimony,  [*48]  which generally confirmed a "giant" preference for the identified groups borne out by his statistical analysis. Tr.Exh. 332, 2 Tr. 71-72. Reviewing all fact findings de novo, the court of appeals, with no mention of the district court's finding or the evidence, apparently concluded that the Law School made no such distinction (i.e., that it gave a preference for all Hispanics), and it concluded that it would grant "some degree of deference . . . to the educational judgment of the Law School in its determination of which groups to target." Pet. App. 37a. Thus, remarkably, the court of appeals gave considerable deference to the administrators who discriminated on the basis of race and ethnicity, and no deference at all to the trier of fact. The court below got it exactly backwards. 

Important and divergent legal consequences follow from the opposing findings of the district court and the court of appeals. The identity of the racial and ethnic groups included in the preferences as found by the district court are even more arbitrary, haphazard, and random than those identified by the court of appeals' findings. This is certainly not consistent with narrow tailoring. See, e.g., J.A. Croson Co., 488 U.S. at 506. The failure of the Law School to consider race-neutral alternatives is a glaring departure from narrow-tailoring requirements. Id. at 507. And the Law School's reservation of a percentage of the class for members of designated racial and ethnic groups is forbidden by the case to which it looks to for cover, Bakke. Accordingly, under a correctly applied clearly-erroneous standard, the Law School's racial and ethnic preferences could not survive even if they had been justified by a compelling interest. 

 [*49]  CONCLUSION 

For all the foregoing reasons, the judgment of the court of appeals should be reversed. 

The University has not met its heavy burden of justifying the racial preferences that it employs in student  [*12]  admissions. The large, mechanical preferences given for all years at issue to members of specified racial or ethnic groups that the University deems to be "underrepresented" on the campus are not narrowly tailored to achieve a compelling purpose, or any purpose except racial balancing. Although the University purports to employ the preferences on the authority of Justice Powell's opinion in Regents of University of California v. Bakke, 438 U.S. 263 (1978), they cannot be upheld on that basis. 

The automatic award of a fixed preference to every member of a specified racial or ethnic group is nothing like what Justice Powell approved in Bakke. Indeed, he rejected the systematic award of preferences, based solely on race or ethnicity, that the University's preferences entail. Justice Powell voted to strike down the quota system under consideration in Bakke. He made clear that there is more than one way to operate a quota, and the University's system is certainly the functional equivalent of one. This is true for all the multiple forms that the preferences have taken, both before and after commencement of the suit. Their common denominator is the maintenance of a race-based double standard in admissions. The purpose and effect of the University's policies is to admit all "qualified" members from the preferred minority groups, while requiring "qualified" applicants from all other groups to compete for the scarce places remaining in the class. These preferences are certainly more potent than those struck down in Bakke, in which many qualified minorities were rejected, and in which the preference was confined to disadvantaged members of the designated minority groups. 

Similar considerations demonstrate that the University's preferences are unlawful in light of the factors that the Court's other precedents have considered important to the narrow-tailoring analysis. The preferences are of unlimited duration; the assumption that diversity of viewpoints and perspectives will be achieved by selecting students based on their race amounts to impermissible stereotyping; and race-neutral alternatives to the preferences have not been meaningfully considered. 

 [*13]  While intellectual diversity can be obtained through race-neutral means, namely through looking for such diversity directly, rather than through using race as a proxy, an interest in diversity is neither a compelling state interest, nor one suited to narrowly-tailored means consistent with this Court's precedents. The Court did not recognize an interest in diversity as a compelling justification for racial preference in Bakke, as only Justice Powell endorsed it as such. His rationale, derived from principles of "academic freedom," finds no support in the Court's cases on that subject. 

The Court's precedents subsequent to Bakke have in fact rejected some of the premises upon which Justice Powell's rationale would grant discretion to educational institutions to consider race in admissions. These precedents have established standards for judging whether an interest is compelling. They are standards that an interest in diversity cannot possibly pass. The interest has no principled limits, particularly when, as the University argues, the scope of the interest, and the types of diversity to be sought, are subject to the discretion and judgment of those who will employ the preferences. The interest is at least as amorphous and indefinite as other interests rejected as compelling, such as remedying the effects of societal discrimination or providing role models to children. This is so whether or not such interests also produce benefits, educational or otherwise. 

The University's unbridled use of race and ethnicity in making admissions decisions belies its claim that it has relied on anything contained in Bakke to justify its preferences. It is settled law that race and ethnicity can be used only when necessary to achieve a compelling interest, and then only through narrowly-tailored means. As this and other litigated cases demonstrate, there is no principled, limited, workable way that race and ethnicity can be used to achieve an interest in diversity consistent with constitutional standards. 

 [*14]  To justify the use of race and ethnicity as considerations in admissions on the basis that diversity is a compelling interest would be to make a substantial and dramatic break from this Court's articulated equal-protection principles. It would infringe on fundamental rights protected by the Fourteenth Amendment and the other civil rights statutes at issue here. 

ARGUMENT 
  
The University of Michigan's Use of Racial Preferences in Undergraduate Admissions Violates the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment, Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. § 2000d), and 42 U.S.C. § 1981.
  
Racial discriminations imposed by law, or having the sanction or support of government, inevitably tend to undermine the foundations of a society dedicated to freedom, justice, and equality. The proposition that all men are created equal is not mere rhetoric. It implies a rule of law--an indispensable condition to a free society--under which all men stand equal and alike in the rights and opportunities secured to them by their government. 
  
--Brief Amicus Curiae of the United States (1952) n6 
  
Race is a defining characteristic of American life. 
  
--Brief of the University of Michigan (1999) n7


n6 Brief Amicus Curiae of the United States (1952) filed in Brown v. Board of Educ., 347 U.S. 483 (1954), quoted in 49 LANDMARK BRIEFS AND ARGUMENTS OF THE SUPREME COURT 118 (Philip B. Kurland & Gerhard Casper eds. 1975). 

n7 Record 81, Defendants' Opposition to Plaintiffs' Motion for Partial Summary Judgment and Memorandum in Support of Defendants' Cross-Motion for Summary Judgment (May 3, 1999). 

 [*15]  The issues framed by this case present two fundamentally different visions of our country and hold out opposing prospects for its future. One seeks to realize "the dream of a Nation of equal citizens in a society where race is irrelevant to personal opportunity and achievement." City of Richmond v. J.A. Croson Co., 488 U.S. 469, 505-06 (1989). The other is based on a view not only that "race matters," n8 but also that race should matter in the government's treatment of individuals, now and indefinitely into the future. The "lesson of the great decisions" of this Court is to embrace the first of these visions and to resolutely repudiate the latter. See ALEXANDER M. BICKEL, THE MORALITY OF CONSENT 133 (1975). n9 Petitioners return to this lesson in asking the Court to invalidate the University's program of racial preferences. 

n8 See, e.g., "Questions and Answers about the Lawsuit Against the University of Michigan Law School," http://www.law.umich.edu/newsandinfo/lawsuit/qanda.htm. 

n9 See also William Van Alstyne, Rites of Passage: Race, The Supreme Court, and the Constitution, 46 U. CHI. L. REV. 775, 797 (1979) ("This judicial resolve to remove the race line from our public life has been the most credible and admirable position for the Court steadfastly to maintain. . . ."). 

The University has repeatedly made the remarkable assertion that we are "as racially separate today as . . . before Brown v. Board of Education, the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and the Voting Rights Act of 1965." n10 Although the statement is certainly false, it should not be surprising that race continues to divide us when official government action tolerates, sponsors, and perpetuates enduring  [*16]  division and different treatment based on race. To the extent that the University's pessimistic view that "your skin color determines . . . where you live, where you go to work, and with whom you work" n11 is true, it is a reason for government to rededicate itself to a commitment to the principle of non-discrimination. It is certainly not a reason or justification for government itself to make decisions about individuals because of their race or "skin color." 

n10 Final Brief of Appellees 36 (July 31, 2001). 

n11 Statement of current University of Michigan President Mary Sue Coleman, http://www.umich.edu/%7Enewsinfo/Releases/2002/Dec02/rl20202.html#coleman. 

It is because racial and ethnic classifications "are by their very nature odious to a free people whose institutions are founded upon the doctrine of equality," Hirabayashi v. United States, 320 U.S. 81, 100 (1943), that we can "tolerate no retreat from the principle that government may treat people differently because of their race only for the most compelling reasons," Adarand Constructors, Inc. v. Pena, 515 U.S. 200, 227 (1995), and that the means employed must also be necessary, i.e., "narrowly tailored" to achieve the compelling interest. Id. 

Governmental commitment to the principle of non-discrimination does not mean that government is disabled from recognizing identified race discrimination and acting to remedy it. Accordingly, the Court has recognized a compelling interest in remedying such discrimination through narrowly-drawn means. Id. at 227; J.A. Croson Co., 488 U.S. at 509. But that is an interest entirely different from one that values an individual more or less than another because of his or her race or ethnicity. The University does the latter when it uses race and ethnicity as factors in deciding who among the many individuals applying for admission receives one of the limited spaces in the class. It has never justified its racial preferences on the grounds of remedying past or present identified discrimination. See Pet. App. 74a. Instead, its stated purpose for considering race in the admissions process is  [*17]  the achievement of "diversity" in the composition of the class. 

Inherent in the concept is the notion that one student will make a greater or lesser contribution to the class because of his or her race or ethnicity. If such a view is accepted, it must be because one can make certain legitimate and relevant assumptions about an individual based on racial and ethnic characteristics. This view should not be tolerated as a justification for racial preferences. See Metro Broadcasting, Inc. v. FCC, 497 U.S. 547, 615 (1990) (O'Connor, J., dissenting) (noting that "the interest in diversity of viewpoints provides no legitimate, much less important, reason to employ race classifications apart from generalizations impermissibly equating race with thoughts and behavior") (emphasis added). Cf. Miller v. Johnson, 515 U.S. 900, 912 (1995) (noting that race-based assignment of voters may "embody stereotypes that treat individuals as the product of their race, evaluating their thoughts and efforts--their very worth as citizens--according to criterion barred to the Government by history and the Constitution") (quoting Metro Broadcasting, Inc., 497 U.S. at 604 (opinion of O'Connor, J., dissenting)). 

The interest in diversity that the University asserts in justification of its racial preferences is based on stereotypes. It looks to use race as a proxy for genuine intellectual diversity that can be found directly in the different outlooks, backgrounds, experiences, and talents of each unique individual. It is not an interest that the Court has ever recognized as a compelling governmental justification for racial preferences. The lone opinion of Justice Powell in Regents of University of California v. Bakke, 438 U.S. 265 (1978), did not establish for the Court a recognized compelling state interest in diversity. The Court's subsequent precedents furnish standards against which the claims for the diversity interest can be measured. What emerges from an analysis of these cases is the conclusion that diversity as a basis for employing racial preferences is simply too open-ended, ill-defined, and indefinite to constitute a compelling interest capable of supporting narrowly-tailored means. Because the interest in diversity  [*18]  is not tied to remedying identified violations of the equality guarantee, it is limited only by the standardless discretion of educational institutions, each making its own choices about the kind of racial and ethnic mix, or diversity, that it desires. See, e.g., Grutter v. Bollinger, 288 F.3d 732, 751 (6th Cir. 2002) (noting that "some degree of deference must be accorded to the educational judgment [of schools] in its determination of which groups to target"). 

The University's use of racial preferences is a case study in their dangers and the reasons why they cannot be constitutionally justified by an interest in diversity. The preferences treat applicants not as unique human beings, but instead as members of discrete racial and ethnic enclaves. Bare racial and ethnic status is enough to qualify or disqualify an applicant for substantially different treatment and outcomes in the admissions process. 

Moreover, the University's actual use of racial preferences on a rationale never accepted by the Court as compelling does not remotely resemble the kind of consideration of race and ethnicity that Justice Powell endorsed in Bakke. Far from relying on Justice Powell's approach, the University has ignored and even repudiated it. In a number of respects, it operates the kind of "two-track" or "dual" admission system, Bakke, 438 U.S. at 315 (opinion of Powell, J.), that Justice Powell's analysis and the result in Bakke forbid. The means employed by the University also embody clear departures from principles laid down by the Court's more recent precedents. 

Having failed to meet its heavy burden of proving that its use of racial preferences is narrowly tailored to achieving a compelling state interest, the University has violated plaintiffs' rights under the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment and Title VI, 42 U.S.C. § 2000d. n12  [*19]  The University's preferences also violate plaintiffs' rights under 42 U.S.C. § 1981, which forbids discrimination on the basis of race in contracting, including contracts for educational services. See discussion infra at 49. 

n12 The Court has held that Title VI prohibits only that conduct prohibited by the Equal Protection Clause, so that the same strict-scrutiny analysis applies to plaintiffs' Title VI claims. See, e.g., Alexander v. Sandoval, 532 U.S. 275, 285-86 (2001). 
  
I. The University's Use of Racial Preferences Demonstrates Defiant Resistance to This Court's Precedents. 

In defending its rigid, mechanical racial preferences on the asserted ground that they comport with Justice Powell's strictures on the use of race in admissions as set forth in his opinion in Bakke, the University in fact mocks that opinion. What Justice Powell alone wrote about academic freedom and diversity as justifications for the consideration of race in admissions processes, the University reads broadly as an endorsement by the Court. Yet what a majority actually decided with respect to the admissions program struck down in Bakke, the University treats as if the analysis was good for that case only. The means employed by the University through its use of racial preferences are manifestly unlawful under Bakke as well as the Court's subsequent precedents. See, e.g., City of Richmond v. J.A. Croson Co., 488 U.S. 469 (1989). Because the University has the temerity to defend its egregious preferences on the basis of Justice Powell's opinion in Bakke, it is instructive to begin there. 

A. In Bakke, the "special admissions program" of the University of California Medical School at Davis ("Davis") reserved 16% of the places in the first-year class for members of specified racial and ethnic minorities who were educationally or economically disadvantaged. Bakke, 438 U.S. at 275 (opinion of Powell, J.). Like the University's admissions system, the Davis program operated on a "rolling" admissions basis, i.e., applications were acted on throughout the admissions season. Id. Also like the University, Davis reserved places in the class only for "qualified" members of the designated minority racial groups. Many more minority students applied for the program than there were available spaces, and most  [*20]  minority applicants were rejected under both the special and regular admissions programs. Id. at 275-76 & n.5. The program was also "flexible" insofar as there was no "floor" or "ceiling" on the total number of minority applicants to be admitted. Id. at 288 n.26. That is, Davis did not use all the reserved seats for disadvantaged minority students if there was an insufficient number of such applicants who qualified. Id. Five Justices, including Justice Powell, held that the Davis program unlawfully considered race in the admissions process. Id. at 320 (opinion of Powell, J.); id. at 421 (opinion of Stevens, J., joined by Burger, C.J., Stewart, and Rehnquist, JJ.). Another group of five Justices, also including Justice Powell, reversed the judgment of the California Supreme Court enjoining Davis from using race under any circumstances. Id. at 320 (opinion of Powell, J.); id. at 326 (opinion of Brennan, J., joined by White, Marshall, and Blackmun, JJ.). No one theory, though, explained for what purposes race could be used. 

Justice Powell's vote to invalidate the Davis program made for a majority since four other Justices in Bakke decided on different grounds that race could not be considered in the admissions process. Because Justice Powell's analysis allowed for some consideration of race, what is prohibited in the consideration of race under his analysis is prohibited by a majority of the Court in Bakke. This is so independent of any assessment about whether his articulation of permissible uses of race states a rationale for a holding of the Court on the basis of a differently constituted majority. 

Although the Davis program involved the "reservation of a specified number" of spaces in the class for disadvantaged members of designated racial and ethnic minorities, Justice Powell's discussion of the limitations on the use of race was not confined to such programs. In approving of the use of race as a "plus" factor to achieve the kind of diversity that he believed was a legitimate goal, id. at 317, Justice Powell made clear that the kind of program he might approve was one in which the race or ethnicity of an applicant would be (in Justice Powell's formulation)  [*21]  "weighed fairly and competitively" along with other factors. Id. at 318. 

Justice Powell repeatedly made the point that in assembling a diverse or heterogenous student body, race or ethnicity was a factor that could be considered on an individualized, case-by-case basis, rather than in a systematic, generalized fashion. Thus, he reasoned that "race or ethnic background may be deemed a 'plus' in a particular applicant's file. . . . The file of a particular black applicant may be examined for his potential contribution to diversity without the factor of race being decisive." Id. at 317 (emphasis added). 

While the Davis formal quota was unlawful under these principles, there are a number of ways in which the University's preferences are even more egregious than those of the Davis program. The University grants a large preference for race and ethnicity automatically and mechanically. The preference requires no showing other than membership in one of the preferred racial or ethnic groups. This is true for all years at issue. Thus, for example, in years 1995-1997, having a specified racial or ethnic identity (African American, Hispanic, or Native American) was alone sufficient ground for having admissions decisions made under written guidelines separate from, and generally less selective than, guidelines applicable to all other races and ethnicities. Beginning with the entering class in 1998, mere possession of the specified racial or ethnic status has been enough to entitle an applicant automatically to 20 points out of a total of 150 (with 95 to 100 points generally sufficient for admission). Thus, for example, two students who each earn 75 to 80 points before the consideration of race can expect to have dramatically different admissions outcomes because of race if only one of them is an "underrepresented" minority. The existence of a "two-track" system could not be more apparent. 

The Davis program, in contrast, limited the preference, i.e., eligibility for consideration in its special admissions program, to "economically and/or educationally  [*22]  disadvantaged" members of the specified minority groups. Id. at 274 & n.4. Indeed, Justice Brennan and those Justices who joined his opinion, found it significant that Davis did not "equate minority status with disadvantage." Id. at 377 (opinion of Brennan, J.). The rote granting of the preference is also the antithesis of the "individualized," and "case-by-case" basis on which Justice Powell thought an institution could decide that "race or ethnic background may be deemed a 'plus' in a particular applicant's file." Id. at 317, 319 n.53 (opinion of Powell, J.) (emphasis added). Under its system of preferences, the University does not need to know anything about an applicant--not his or her background, interests, experiences, achievements, academic or other credentials--other than race and ethnicity before awarding the flat 20 points for those characteristics. n13 Hence, the University's racial and ethnic preferences are unlawful under any of the rationales articulated in Bakke. 

n13 In its brief in the court of appeals, the University crystallized the nature of its systematic, rather than particularized, case-by-case, consideration of race: "To enroll meaningful numbers of minorities, every underrepresented minority receives a 'plus' for race." Final Brief of Appellees 55 n.32 (July 31, 2001) (emphasis added). The University has thus inverted the Constitution's "'command that the Government must treat citizens "as individuals, not 'as simply components of a racial . . . class.'"'" Miller v. Johnson, 515 U.S. 900, 911 (1995) (quoting Metro Broadcasting, Inc., 497 U.S. at 602 (O'Connor, J., dissenting) (quoting Arizona Governing Comm. For Tax Deferred Annuity and Deferred Compensation Plans v. Norris, 463 U.S. 1073, 1083 (1983))). 

Another respect in which the University's preferences are far more extensive and sweeping (and hence less narrowly tailored) than those invalidated in Bakke is that the purpose and effect of the University's preferences is to admit all "qualified" applicants from the designated racial and ethnic groups, while "qualified" students of all other races must compete for the limited seats in the class. App. 80-81; Pet. App. 46a. Like the formal quota in Bakke, the  [*23]  dual standard employed by the University insulates members of the preferred racial and ethnic groups from competition from members of the disfavored racial groups. If admissions standards are lowered for some racial and ethnic groups so that merely being "qualified" virtually assures admission, then in no true sense can it be said that these students compete for admission against anyone, much less against students from other racial and ethnic groups. In this feature, the University's preference can be said to constitute a form of a 100% quota, worse than the Davis quota, which was capped not by the total number of qualified minorities who applied, but by the 16 reserved spaces in the class. See Metro Broadcasting, Inc., 497 U.S. at 630 (O'Connor, J., dissenting) ("There is no more rigid quota than a 100% set-aside."). 

In the district court, the University sought to limit the prohibitions of Bakke to "fixed" or "rigid" quotas or programs in which "unqualified" students were admitted as a result of the preferences. Record 81, Defendants' Opposition to Plaintiffs' Motion for Partial Summary Judgment and Memorandum in Support of Defendants' Cross-Motion for Summary Judgment 39-47 (May 3, 1999). Of course, Bakke did not even present the second issue for consideration; the program was struck down despite the fact that only "qualified" applicants were eligible for admission under the special admissions program. Bakke, 438 U.S. at 288-89 & n.26 (opinion of Powell, J.). The University's program of preferences is not saved, therefore, merely by establishing that it only admits "qualified" applicants through use of its preferences. This attribute becomes particularly meaningless in light of the highly competitive nature of the admissions program for all other students, for whom being merely "qualified" is not a sufficient condition for admission. 

In trying to limit Bakke to prohibiting only "fixed" or "rigid" quotas, the University ignores what Justice Powell actually wrote. A system of racial preferences that "operated as a cover for the functional equivalent of a quota" cannot withstand scrutiny. Baake, 438 U.S. at 318. This is the only result that makes any sense unless questions of  [*24]  constitutional violations are to be reduced to an exercise in formalism. Among the things that Justice Powell condemned about the Davis quota was that it set up a race-based "two-track" or "dual admissions" program, in which "simple ethnic diversity" provided the criteria for the dividing line between the two systems. There is more than one way to accomplish those illegitimate objectives, and the University demonstrates that there are many. 

The University's racial preferences are quite literally as well as functionally "two-track" or "dual." The University's employment of separate standards of admission for the "underrepresented" minorities and all other groups is the sine qua non of a dual system. It makes no difference whether the substantive separateness is reflected tangibly, as on separate pages of the race-based grids in use for 1995, or visually, as when the different guidelines were combined on the same page (1996-1997). The inherent separateness continued, moreover, with the adoption of the 150-point selection-index system beginning with the 1998 class. Indeed, the selection index was statistically designed by the University so that it "simply captured the same outcomes produced by the prior [grid] system." Record 81, Defendants' Opposition to Plaintiffs' Motion for Partial Summary Judgment and Memorandum in Support of Defendants' Cross-Motion for Summary Judgment at 20 (May 3, 1999); see also Pet. App. 34a; App. 277. It would again be a triumph of form over substance to find a constitutionally significant distinction between the systems operated by Davis and the University in that the former accomplished its purposes through a separate admissions committee. Separate admissions committees are simply unnecessary when separate admissions standards are employed instead. For adherence to constitutional standards to turn on such manipulations would be pure farce. It is untenable, therefore, to conclude both that grids are impermissible and that the selection index derived from the grids is not. 

Accordingly, the district court was certainly correct in concluding that the admissions systems for years 1995-1998 were impermissible. But it was wrong to imply that a  [*25]  dispositive difference exists between those years and 1999 and 2000 because of the use in the earlier years of reserved seats and formally segregated waiting lists. Both are indeed egregious practices, which the University still steadfastly defends. By themselves, they would justify striking down the policies in effect during the years when they were employed. The changes in the 1999 and 2000 admissions program cannot, however, justify the district court's conclusion that those programs are lawful. The programs maintain the same rigid racial and ethnic categories for the preference as the earlier years. The award of preference through 20 points added for race and ethnicity is just as automatic and mechanical as when the same award of points was made in 1998 and when separate admissions outcomes were plotted on "grids" in 1995, 1996, and 1997. The large number of points awarded for racial and ethnic status has remained unchanged, and there have been no significant changes in relative size of the point-based preference. Thus, the 20-point award remains the equivalent of a full grade point on the scale, effectively transforming by University fiat a "B" student into an "A" student for purposes of the admissions decision. It is more than would be assigned to a student who achieved a perfect ACT or SAT score and who also received points for outstanding "personal achievement" or "leadership service." Whatever it means for race or ethnicity to be considered "competitively" or "weighed fairly" in the admissions process, Bakke, 438 U.S. at 318 (opinion of Powell, J.), it certainly cannot mean this. 

The district court expressed the view that there was nothing wrong with the University's award of 20 points because points were awarded for other factors as well. Pet. App. 39a. The argument has no force for several reasons. It recognizes no limit on the size of the preference relative to other factors that receive points, thus nullifying whatever Justice Powell meant when he wrote about race and ethnicity being "weighed fairly" and "competitively." It also ignores the fact that the points in the selection index, including the 20 points for race, were chosen for a reason--to "admit the same class as if using [the] old [grid] method."  [*26]  App. 277. The University has simply demonstrated what Justice Brennan accurately perceived:
  
There is no sensible, and certainly no constitutional, distinction between, for example, adding a set number of points to the admission rating of disadvantaged minority applicants as an expression of the preference with the expectation that this will result in the admission of an approximately determined number of qualified minority applicants and setting a fixed number of places for such applicants as was done [at Davis].
  
Bakke, 438 U.S. at 378 (opinion of Brennan, J.) (emphasis added). Justice Powell implicitly acknowledged that circumstances could arise in which Justice Brennan's view was correct, i.e., that a university "would operate" its admissions policy as a "cover for the functional equivalent of a quota system." Id. at 318 (opinion of Powell, J.). He just did not believe courts should assume that educational institutions would act in such a manner. In this case, the undisputed evidence proves that the University has so acted. 

As Justice Powell explained, a "two-track" race-based system does not become legitimate by expanding it into a "multi-track program." Id. at 315. By the same reasoning, a point-based admissions system like the University's, which can effectively achieve the same results as a formal race quota, is no less effective as such merely because it awards points for other factors as well. So the University's large and statistically determined preference cannot be successfully defended on the ground that race is not the only factor that receives consideration. 

Justice Powell described the Davis special admissions program as one impermissibly "focused solely on ethnic diversity." Id. Notably, he applied this description to the special admissions program, not to admissions as a whole. Moreover, he described it so even though the special admissions program was limited to disadvantaged minorities, and then only to those disadvantaged minorities who were "qualified," meaning Davis also paid some attention  [*27]  to academic criteria, such as grades and test scores. Indeed, applications to the special admissions program were rated "in a fashion similar to that used by the regular committee," which considered the "candidate's overall grade point average, grade point average in science courses, scores on the Medical College Admissions Test (MCAT), letters of recommendation, extracurricular activities, and other biographical data." Id. at 274-75 (emphasis added). 

Compared to the Davis special admissions program, the University's system of racial and ethnic preferences is no less focused "solely" on race and ethnicity. The University's racial and ethnic preferences are purely defined by race and ethnicity, and this is no less true simply because the University weighs other factors in the admission process, as did Davis, both for "underrepresented" minority applicants and all other students. Each among the multiplicity of these preferences employed over the years has been designed to achieve one thing only: "simple ethnic diversity." Id. at 315. This is true for the complete litany: the articulated double standard for "qualified" students from the designated minority groups versus "qualified" students from other groups; the grids; the half-point added on the basis of race to the grade point calculation in 1997; the "protected" spaces in the class, the segregated waiting lists, the 20-point selection-index award, and the eligibility on the basis of race and ethnicity for "flagging" in the wait-list pool. To Justice Powell, "preferring members of any one group for no reason other than race or ethnic origin is discrimination for its own sake . . . [which] the Constitution forbids." Id. at 307. The University's regime of preferences defined exclusively on the basis of race and ethnicity do just that. 

B.1. The unlawfulness of the University's racial preferences for all years is manifest also when viewed in light of the traditional factors that this Court has looked to for assessing whether a program of racial preferences is narrowly tailored to achieve a compelling interest. See, e.g., J.A. Croson Co., 488 U.S. at 507-08; United States v.  [*28]  Paradise, 480 U.S. 149, 171 (1987). The preferences are of unlimited duration. The University has provided no termination date, and it offers no standards for judging when the preferences should come to an end. A consistent thread running throughout the Court's precedents on race-based means is the insistence that they be temporary departures from the rule of equal treatment. See, e.g., J.A. Croson Co., 488 U.S. at 510 ("Proper findings . . . defining both the scope of the injury and the extent of the remedy . . . serve to assure all citizens that the deviation from the norm of equal treatment of all racial and ethnic groups is a temporary matter, a measure taken in the service of the goal of equality itself."). 

Even for preferences subject to less exacting review than demanded for race-based classifications under the Equal Protection Clause, the Court has emphasized the importance of the temporary nature of the preferences. See, e.g., United Steelworkers of America v. Weber, 443 U.S. 193, 208 (1979) (Title VII) ("Moreover, the plan is a temporary measure; it is not intended to maintain racial balance, but simply to eliminate a manifest racial imbalance."); Johnson v. Transportation Agency, Santa Clara County, 480 U.S. 616, 618 (1987) (gender discrimination) ("agency's express commitment to 'attain' a balanced work force" ensures that plan will be of limited duration). Because the University's preferences must satisfy the higher and most exacting standard imposed by the Fourteenth Amendment, it is manifest, a fortiori, that the absence of temporal limits for the University's racial and ethnic preferences is fatal to their constitutionality. 

2. There is also no demonstrated relationship or closeness of fit of means to ends. Although the asserted purpose of the preferences is to achieve the purported educational benefits of diversity, nowhere has the University met its burden of demonstrating how much diversity is necessary to reach the "critical mass" that achieves those benefits, or how much of a preference (e.g., how many points on the selection index) must be given to reach the undefined level of diversity or critical mass. Nowhere does the University demonstrate what the marginal  [*29]  benefits of increased diversity are compared to what these benefits would be in a system that did not employ racial preferences. See, e.g., Grutter v. Bollinger, 288 F.3d at 803-08 (Boggs, J., dissenting). The absence of evidence on these points is not surprising given that the preferences cannot be said to be reasonably related to any goal other than maximizing the presence in the class (admitting virtually all "qualified" applicants) from the groups singled out for preferential treatment. The focus on the three groups deemed by the University to be "underrepresented" on the campus is indistinguishable from "outright racial balancing." J.A. Croson Co., 488 U.S. at 507; see also Wessmann v. Gittens, 160 F.3d 790, 799 (1st Cir. 1998) (invalidating racial preferences in assignment of students to public middle schools) ("Underrepresentation is merely racial balancing in disguise--another way of suggesting that there may be optimal proportions for the representation of races and ethnic groups in institutions."); Lutheran Church-Missouri Synod v. FCC, 141 F.3d 344, 352 (D.C. Cir. 1998) (invalidating FCC regulations imposing race-based diversity obligations on license holders) ("The very term 'underrepresentation' necessarily implies that if such a situation exists, the station is behaving in a manner that falls short of the desired outcome."). 

The poor fit of means to ends is also shown in the grant of preferences on mere showing of an applicant's racial or ethnic status, while the asserted benefits of the diversity objective are found in the background, experiences, and outlooks brought to the University by members of the "underrepresented" groups. The University uses race as a "proxy" for the "views that it believes to be underrepresented" in the student body. Metro Broadcasting, Inc., 497 U.S. at 621 (O'Connor, J., dissenting). The preferences "directly equate race with belief and behavior, for they establish race as a necessary and sufficient condition for securing the preference." Id. at 618. The assumption that the students from particular racial and ethnic groups will bring to the school viewpoints, experiences, ideas, and perspectives that the University considers unique to  [*30]  them merely on account of their membership in a racial or ethnic category is an offensive stereotype. The "corollary" to the University's notion of diversity "is plain: Individuals of unfavored racial and ethnic backgrounds are unlikely to possess the unique experiences and background that contribute to viewpoint diversity." Id. at 619. 

3. A system of racial preferences like the University's that automatically and mechanically awards large preferences cannot plausibly by described as "flexible." Paradise, 480 U.S. at 171. The Eleventh Circuit reached the same conclusion in striking down on narrow-tailoring grounds similar preferences in effect at the University of Georgia. See Johnson v. Board of Regents of University of Georgia, 263 F.3d 1234, 1254-57 (11th Cir. 2001) ("This rigid, mechanical approach to considering race is itself incompatible with the need for flexibility in the admissions process."). 

4. The University also failed in its burden of demonstrating that it has considered race-neutral alternatives. Paradise, 480 U.S. at 171. The district court accepted the University's arguments about why it should not have to employ race-neutral alternatives, Pet. App. 40a-43a, but failed to address whether it had given consideration to alternatives. For example, it relied on the opinions of one of the University's litigation experts, who testified about the experiences at the University of Texas. Id. at 41a-42a. This was hardly evidence sufficient to entitle the University to summary judgment on the consideration of raceneutral alternatives, with all reasonable inferences to be drawn in favor of plaintiffs, especially since the evidence was not even from those actually charged with formulating the admissions policies. Moreover, citing to the size of the applicant pool and differentials in test scores among racial groups, id. at 40a-41a, merely begs the question of whether the University has considered making changes to its admissions policies that achieve the diversity it seeks through race-neutral means. 

 [*31]  5. Finally, the impact on parties is certainly great, Paradise, 480 U.S. at 171, as the race-based double standard in admissions acts to exclude many applicants because of their race. The harmful effect of the preferences is not mitigated, moreover, by an argument that removal of the preferences would have "only a small positive effect on . . . [the] probability of admission" for students from the disfavored races. The same was true in Bakke: invalidating the Davis program opened up only 16 spaces for the hundreds or more of competing applicants. Bakke, 438 U.S. at 273 & n.2. 
  
II. "Academic Freedom" and "Diversity" Are Not Compelling Interests Justifying Racial Preferences. 

A. Justice Powell's singular opinion in Bakke did not establish for the Court a rationale that interests in "academic freedom" or "diversity" are compelling ones justifying racial preferences in admissions. The joinder in Part V-C of his opinion by Justices Brennan, White, Marshall, and Blackmun did not make for such a majority because that part of the opinion says nothing about diversity or academic freedom. There is nothing remarkable, moreover, about the decision of those five Justices reversing the judgment of the state court's blanket prohibition of any consideration of race in admissions. Such a judgment and injunction was arguably too broad because race and ethnicity may constitutionally, at least, be considered to achieve a compelling interest through narrowly-tailored means. But Part V-C does not address what those compelling interests are, and the fractured opinions of the Court cannot support a conclusion that there was agreement among a majority of the Justices on what interests would be compelling. 

The district court suggested that the conclusion that Justice Powell's diversity rationale had the endorsement of a majority of the Justices in Bakke can be supported by "Justice Brennan's silence" on the subject in his separate opinion. Pet. App. 18a. But this is not so. It is at least  [*32]  equally likely that remaining silent, especially while also writing separately, indicates the opposite. In any event, surely a rationale for the Court can be reasonably deduced only from what the opinions of the Justices actually contain, not from speculation about what a Justice "would have embraced." Id. (quoting Smith v. University of Washington Law School, 233 F.3d 1188, 1200 (9th Cir. 2000), cert. denied, 532 U.S. 1051 (2001)). What Justice Brennan's opinion contains is language indicating that his support for the use of race and ethnicity in admissions was tied to remedying the lingering effects of societal discrimination. See Bakke, 438 U.S. at 324-26, n.1 (opinion of Brennan, J.). Indeed, he defined the "central meaning" of the different opinions in the case to be that government "may take race into account . . . to remedy disadvantages cast on minorities by past racial prejudice, at least when appropriate findings have been made by judicial, legislative, or administrative bodies with competence to act in this area." Id. at 325. 

The principles articulated by this Court in Marks v. United States, 430 U.S. 188 (1977), cannot be used to divine a rationale for the constitutional consideration of race in the various Bakke opinions. The analyses of Justices Powell and Brennan are simply too different to find a common denominator between the diversity and remedial rationales. n14 The disagreement in the lower courts on whether the Marks analysis yields an answer on whether there is a majority rationale to be found in the Bakke opinions on the constitutional use of race is just further  [*33]  evidence that it is "not useful" to pursue the analysis. Nichols v. United States, 511 U.S. 738 (1994). There are indications that the Court agrees. In Adarand Constructors, Inc., 515 U.S. at 218, five members of the current Court agreed that "Bakke did not produce an opinion for the Court." The other four Justices joined in expressing the same sentiment in Alexander v. Sandoval, 532 U.S. 275, 308 n.15 (2001) (Stevens, J., dissenting, joined by Souter, Ginsburg, Breyer, JJ.) (noting that the five Justices in Bakke who voted to overturn the injunction imposed by the lower courts "divided over the application of the Equal Protection Clause--and by extension Title VI--to affirmative action cases" and that "therefore, it is somewhat strange to treat the opinions of those five Justices in Bakke as constituting a majority for any particular substantive interpretation of Title VI"). 

n14 There is a common denominator in the two opinions on the remedial rationales for the consideration of race. Clearly, Justice Powell's rationale, tied to remedying identified discrimination, Bakke, 438 U.S. at 307 (opinion of Powell, J.), is narrower than Justice Brennan's rationale, which justifies the consideration of race to remedy societal discrimination, id. at 324-26 (opinion of Brennan, J.). Read in such a fashion, the opinions in Bakke are consistent with Court's subsequent precedents. See, e.g., J.A. Croson Co., 488 U.S. at 504-06, 509. 

What remains is the need to independently ascertain whether the rationale articulated by Justice Powell can support his conclusion that diversity is a compelling interest justifying racial preferences in admissions, and to determine whether the Court's subsequent precedents cast light on the issue. As discussed below, these modes of analyses demonstrate that the University's use of racial preferences cannot be justified on an interest in promoting "diversity." 

B. Justice Powell articulated a compelling interest in diversity as an incident to a First Amendment right of academic freedom possessed by educational institutions. The issues at stake in the "academic freedom" cases cited by Justice Powell in support of his analysis in Bakke, however, had nothing to do with what criterion an educational institution might employ in selecting a student body. Sweezy v. New Hampshire, 354 U.S. 234 (1957), concerned a criminal contempt citation given to a professor who declined to answer questions about his classroom lectures and political affiliations propounded to him by the state's attorney general. Similarly, Keyishian v. Board of Regents, 385 U.S. 589 (1967), involved a state statute requiring state-employed professors to sign oaths satisfying the state that a teacher employed by it was not a "subversive."  [*34]  In both cases, the Court invalidated the action taken against the professors as impermissible intrusions on their First Amendment rights. The cases plainly implicated rights of intellectual freedom, and they contain testaments to the importance in a free society of keeping a commitment to the openness to ideas--to academic freedom--that is essential to the character of university communities. 

It was to one of the concurring opinions in Sweezy that Justice Powell looked for some direct connection between that case and Bakke. Justice Frankfurter had quoted in Sweezy a statement authored by besieged proponents of the "open" universities of South Africa. Their statement identified the "four essential freedoms" of a university to be the right to "determine for itself on academic grounds who may teach, what may be taught, how it shall be taught, and who may be admitted to study." Sweezy, 354 U.S. at 263 (opinion of Frankfurter, J., concurring in the result) (quoting THE OPEN UNIVERSITIES OF SOUTH AFRICA 10-12 (a statement of a conference of senior scholars from the University of Cape Town and the University of Witwaterstrand)). 

It would be ironic and tragic if an eloquent statement intended as a plea against racial exclusion at university communities becomes instead a clarion call in service of the opposite proposition. None of the Court's precedents stand for the principle that "academic freedom" encompasses the right to give any consideration to race or ethnicity as a reason for admitting or excluding students. It is inherent in the "lesson of the great decisions of the Court," that the principle is an intolerable one. BICKEL, supra, at 133. Indeed, the actual outcomes in a number of the Court's cases constitute at least an implicit rejection of the notion that asserted "academic" justifications can make racial discrimination tolerable by educational institutions. See, e.g., Runyon v. McCrary, 427 U.S. 160, 173-75 (1976) (invalidating under 42 U.S.C. § 1981 the racially discriminatory admissions policies of private school); Bob Jones Univ. v. United States, 461 U.S. 574, 595 (1983) (upholding IRS revocation of tax-exempt status  [*35]  of two universities based on their racially discriminatory policies). Cf. University of Pennslyvania v. E.E.O.C., 493 U.S. 182, 197-202 (1990) (rejecting argument of university that its right to academic freedom protected from disclosure peer review materials relating to the tenure process for former faculty member who alleged discrimination on the basis of race and sex) ("In our view, petitioner's reliance on the so-called academic-freedom cases is somewhat misplaced. In those cases [e.g., Sweezy and Keyishian] government was attempting to control or direct the content of the speech engaged in by the university or those affiliated with it."). 

Even if not expressly articulated as such, an interest in furnishing role models to minority children by employing minority teachers is a classic fit with the academic freedom model. It is an interest that directly implicates one of the "four essential freedoms" inherent in academic freedom: the right to determine "who may teach." Sweezy, 354 U.S. at 263 (opinion of Frankfurter, J., concurring in the result). The use of race as a factor in choosing role model teachers is unquestionably one made on asserted "academic grounds." Id. Teachers teach, and certainly the reason for offering a teacher as any kind of a role model is to produce some educational benefit for the students taught. Yet laudable as the interest is, it is not one that can be a compelling interest justifying racial preferences in the employment of teachers. See Wygant v. Jackson Bd. of Educ., 476 U.S. 266, 276 (1986) (plurality opinion) (rejecting role model theory); id. at 288 (opinion of O'Connor, J., concurring in part and concurring in the judgment) (rejecting role model theory). See also J.A. Croson Co., 488 U.S. at 497-98 (holding that an interest in remedying lingering effects of societal discrimination had the same fatal defects as the "role model" theory employed in Wygant). 

Grounding a right to practice race discrimination on "academic freedom" principles would have dangerous and far-reaching consequences. It entails opening the door to racial considerations in student admissions or faculty  [*36]  appointments whenever doing so is based on the kind of "speculation, experiment, and creation," Sweezy, 354 U.S. at 263 (opinion of Frankfurter, J., concurring in the result), that is at the heart of academic inquiry and judgments. Any principled and genuine acceptance of academic freedom as an exception to the requirements of the Fourteenth Amendment would have to recognize that the number of ways in which race might be a factor in admissions is limited only by the number of academic theories that might today or someday justify such consideration. If it could be shown that an educational theory supported the education of individuals in racially homogenous groups, a seriously recognized compelling interest in academic freedom as a justification for racial preferences would logically have to permit policies designed to further that end. See Grutter, 288 F.3d at 805 n.37 (Boggs, J., dissenting) (noting that at the time of Brown v. Board of Education "there were certainly researchers with academic degrees who argued that segregated education would provide greater educational benefits for both races"); id. ("Questions have been raised as to the ability or desirability of school districts implementing all-black academies in order to improve educational performance."). n15 

n15 An academic freedom exception to the Fourteenth Amendment would also permit academic grounds to justify differential treatment on the basis of other invidious classifications. See, e.g., United States v. Virginia, 518 U.S. 515, 535 (1996) (state-supported school argued that interest in "diversity" of educational choices should permit all-male admissions policy). 

It should be clear that academic freedom does not lose its status as an important freedom through adherence to the equality guarantee of the Fourteenth Amendment. n16  [*37]  The range of factors that a university may constitutionally consider in selecting its students (or faculty) is virtually infinite. Particularly as academic freedom has been recognized as an intellectual freedom, there is no limit to the viewpoints, perspectives, ideas, character traits, talents, and experiences that a university might properly consider in assembling its community. But our Constitution places "no value" on race discrimination. See Runyon, 427 U.S. 761. It forbids it when practiced or sponsored by the states. Enforcement of the constitutional command that state-sponsored universities not discriminate on the basis of race or ethnicity in student admissions does not impair any genuine interest in academic freedom. But a rule that would recognize the right of educational institutions to consider race and ethnicity in the exercise of academic freedom would vitiate the "core purpose" of the Fourteenth Amendment. Palmore v. Sidoti, 466 U.S. 429, 432 (1984). 

n16 The first explicit mention of academic freedom in this Court's cases was by Justice Douglas in his dissenting opinion in Adler v. Board of Education, 342 U.S. 485, 508 (1952) (Douglas, J., dissenting). In that opinion and in subsequent ones that he either authored or joined in, very broad expression is given to the importance and scope of the right of academic freedom. See, e.g., Whitehill v. Elkins, 389 U.S. 54, 59-60 (1967); Wieman v. Updegraff, 344 U.S. 183, 196-97 (1952) (opinion of Frankfurter, J., joined by Douglas, J., concurring in the judgment); Presidents Council District 25 v. Community Sch. Bd., 409 U.S. 998, 999-1000 (1972) (opinion of Douglas, J., dissenting to denial of petition for certiorari). Yet it is instructive that Justice Douglas wrote powerfully about the evils of racial considerations in the university admissions process. See DeFunis v. Odegaard, 416 U.S. 312, 333-34 (1974) (Douglas, J., dissenting from the Court's decision to remand the case on mootness grounds) ("Once race is a starting point educators and courts are immediately embroiled in competing claims of different racial and ethnic groups that would make difficult, manageable standards consistent with the Equal Protection Clause."); id. at 334 ("Minorities in our midst who are to serve actively in our public affairs should be chosen on talent and character alone, not on cultural orientation or leanings."). 

C. Although the Court has not since Bakke directly addressed whether diversity can be a compelling interest, its precedents demonstrate why it is not one. The Court already has rejected significant parts of Justice Powell's  [*38]  analysis. Justice Powell did not view the difference between a "plus" system and a "set aside" system as simply the difference between a race-conscious system that is narrowly tailored and one that is not. Rather, he concluded that "a facial intent to discriminate" does not "exist[] in an admissions program where race or ethnic background is simply one element--to be weighed fairly against other elements--in the selection process." Bakke, 438 U.S. at 318 (opinion of Powell, J.). In such a system, "good faith would be presumed," id. at 318-19, there would be "a presumption of legality and legitimate educational purpose," id. at 319 n.53, and "there is no warrant for judicial interference in the academic process," id. 

The absence of an intent to discriminate when race is used as a factor is inconsistent with modern equal protection analysis. This Court has made clear that the consideration of race, even if considered along with other factors, constitutes the kind of intentional discrimination that requires strict scrutiny. Price Waterhouse v. Hopkins, 490 U.S. 228, 265 (1989) (O'Connor, J., concurring in the judgment) ("This Court's decisions under the Equal Protection Clause have long recognized that whatever the final outcome of a decisional process, the inclusion of race or sex as a consideration within it harms both society and the individual."). Surely a system like the University's, which gives a set number of points to applicants for being members of an "underrepresented" minority but also gives points to applicants for other characteristics, reflects an "intent to discriminate" as that term is now used in equal protection jurisprudence. It treats similarly-situated applicants from different races differently. See also Johnson v. Board of Regents of Univ. of Georgia, 263 F.3d 1234, 1249 (11th Cir. 2001) (invalidating as unconstitutional an undergraduate admissions system that granted a fixed number of points for race and ethnicity and other factors). 

So, too, the presumption of good faith that Justice Powell attributed to school administrators is simply inconsistent with the notion that strict scrutiny must be applied to the use of race. One of strict scrutiny's key  [*39]  features is "skepticism," Adarand Constructors, Inc., 515 U.S. at 223-24, i.e., the bedrock proposition that all official actions that treat a person differently on account of race or ethnicity are inherently suspect. Even the University here has conceded throughout the course of this litigation that "strict scrutiny" applies to its consideration of race. While it has asked for deference to its judgment from the courts, based upon Justice Powell's words, that deference simply cannot be reconciled with strict scrutiny. See id. at 236 (strict scrutiny requires a "detailed examination, both as to ends and as to means"); id. (strict scrutiny requires "the most searching judicial inquiry"). See also J.A. Croson Co., 488 U.S. at 500 ("Racial classifications are suspect, and that means that simple legislative assurances of good intention cannot suffice."); id. at 493 (opinion of O'Connor, J.) ("Absent searching judicial inquiry into the justification for such race-based measures, there is simply no way of determining what classifications are 'benign' or 'remedial' and what classifications are in fact motivated by illegitimate notions of racial inferiority or simple racial politics."). 

When the strict-scrutiny analysis employed by the Court's precedents in other contexts is applied to the rationale asserted by the University, it becomes clear that an interest in diversity cannot be a compelling one justifying racial preferences in student admissions. Like the role model theory in Wygant, an interest in diversity has "no logical stopping point." Wygant, 476 U.S. at 275 (plurality opinion). Because it bears no relationship to any remedial interest, there are no principled limits on its scope or duration. Tied instead (as the University urges) to the academic discretion and judgments of those who will impose the classifications, a recognized compelling interest in promoting diversity is limited only by the different kinds of racial diversity that educational institutions might seek to achieve. On such a footing, the interest is one that is not subject to any objective, uniform standards, and the preferences effectively become immune from meaningful judicial review. Its recognition would set loose a "potentially far-reaching principle disturbingly at odds  [*40]  with our traditional equal protection doctrine." Metro Broadcasting, Inc., 497 U.S. at 613 (O'Connor, J., dissenting). 

Measuring the logical consequences of a recognized compelling interest in diversity demonstrates why it is that "modern equal protection doctrine has recognized only one [compelling] interest [for racial classifications]: remedying the effects of racial discrimination." Id. at 612. An interest in diversity "is simply too amorphous, too insubstantial, and too unrelated to any legitimate basis for employing racial classifications." Id. Moreover, the test of time has proven the essential truth of the proposition that "unless they are strictly reserved for remedial settings, [racial classifications] may in fact promote notions of racial inferiority and lead to a politics of racial hostility." J.A. Croson Co., 488 U.S. at 493 (opinion of O'Connor, J.). 

It is no satisfactory answer to the foregoing objections to argue that promoting diversity will produce "educational benefits". It certainly can be assumed that remedying the lingering effects of societal discrimination would produce benefits both in the educational system and throughout society generally. As discussed above, a "role model" theory for assigning teachers is premised precisely on the ground that it would produce educational benefits. See Wygant, 476 U.S. at 315 (Stevens, J., dissenting) ("In the context of public education, it is quite obvious that a school board may reasonably conclude that an integrated faculty will be able to provide benefits to the student body that could not be provided by an all-white, or nearly all-white, faculty."). But the reasons that make those interests not "compelling" ones for purposes of justifying racial classifications are the same kinds of reasons that preclude a determination that "diversity" is a compelling interest. See also Grutter, 288 F.3d at 788-95 (Boggs, J., dissenting) (discussing and dismissing the claim that the purported educational benefits of diversity make it a compelling interest). 

The University's articulation of the diversity rationale throughout this case reveals how malleable the interest is. The University often defends the interest on the basis that  [*41]  it is an antidote for the lingering effects of societal discrimination. Hence, it points to patterns of segregation in housing, and elementary and secondary education, for example, as justification for race-based admissions at the university level. See, e.g., Final Brief of Appellees 36 (July 30, 2001). At oral argument on the motions for summary judgment, the University's counsel made explicit reference to the "educational challenge" presented by "segregation" in various areas of society. Record 204, Tr. 34-35, Cir. App. 4163-64. The University and some of its amici have also touted diversity for the benefits accruing to students after they have graduated from college. These arguments demonstrate that there is no principle that confines the interest to the education context. If accepted as compelling, an interest in diversity could become a justification for using race to treat people differently in many walks of life. 

D. 1. In the lower courts, the University has argued that in the intervening years since Bakke was decided, it has become accepted as "settled law" that diversity is a compelling interest in educational admissions and that colleges and universities generally have relied and acted accordingly on this proposition in considering race and ethnicity in admissions. See Final Brief of Appellees 2 (July 31, 2001). The argument is false for several reasons. First, it is a question-begging exercise that tries to assign stare decisis effect to a case not by analyzing what the case actually decided, but instead by accepting one view of how some have interpreted it. 

Second, this Court has never given stare decisis effect, much less "extra" stare decisis effect, to the views of one Justice not joined by any other member of the Court. As already discussed, see discussion supra at 32-33, all nine current Justices (the majority in the 1995 decision in Adarand v. Pena and the dissenters in Alexander v. Sandoval) have recognized that there was no coherent rule supporting the use of race in college admissions emerging from Bakke. From the outset, both courts and academics have questioned whether Justice Powell's discussion of "academic freedom" and "diversity" in Bakke was binding  [*42]  precedent. Peters v. Moses, 613 F. Supp. 1328, 1335 (W.D. Va. 1985) ("I do not believe that Justice Powell's concurring opinion represents the court's opinion in Bakke with regard to this matter."); Drew S. Days, III, Minority Access to Higher Education in the Post-Bakke Era, 55 U. COLO. L. REV. 491, 492 (1984) (noting that "no other Justice joined in [Justice Powell's] opinion" and "there was no opinion of the Court . . ."). 

Third, a question of law can hardly be said to be considered "settled" when the lower courts are riven with disagreement on it. See Pet. 21-22 (discussing cases in which courts have disagreed on Bakke and the status of Justice Powell's opinion, or have expressed reservations, skepticism, or uncertainty about whether an interest in diversity can justify racial preferences). 

Fourth, as already discussed, see discussion supra at 37-39, Justice Powell's Bakke opinion has already been superseded in significant ways. Accordingly, the fundamental doctrinal foundations upon which his analysis stood - that explicit racial considerations could be considered "facially nondiscriminatory" and that certain governmental actors are entitled to deference when using race - has been eroded to the point where it has been, at least implicitly, "left . . . behind as a mere survivor of obsolete constitutional thinking." Planned Parenthood v. Casey, 505 U.S. 833, 857 (1992). 

In light of all the foregoing, surely our nation's leading colleges and universities, employing able in-house counsel and outstanding constitutional scholars, could not have been deluded into believing that whether diversity is a compelling interest justifying racial preferences in admissions was a matter free from doubt. 

2. Apart from whether any reliance was justified, it is also far from accurate to say that the University has "relied" on Justice Powell's articulated formulation for the proper consideration of race and ethnicity in admissions. A viewing of the facts in this and other reported cases arising in similar contexts leads to the conclusion that Justice Powell's opinion has been used instead as a cover  [*43]  to employ all manner of potent racial preferences. Many educational institutions seem to act as if simply describing their admissions programs in language employed by Justice Powell (e.g., "racial or ethnic origin is but a single though important element" considered in achieving diversity, or race and ethnicity are just a "plus" factor in the process, Bakke, 438 U.S. at 315, 317 (opinion of Powell, J.)), is enough to immunize them from successful attack. Thus, in this case alone, the University invokes the usual words to defend admissions policies that have at various times employed reserved seats, racially segregated waiting lists, guidelines on admission that on their face call for different admission outcomes based on race and ethnicity, and automatic assignment on the basis of race of a large enough number of fixed points to accomplish what the discriminatory grids formerly did. 

The University of Georgia has used Justice Powell's formulations to defend its undergraduate admissions systems, which contain similarities to the one at issue here. As recently as 1990-1995, the University of Georgia had an undergraduate admissions policy that had certain minimum qualifications (relating to SAT scores and high school GPA) that differed depending upon whether the applicant was black or non-black. See Wooden v. Board of Regents of Univ. of Georgia, 247 F.3d 1262, 1265 (11th Cir. 2001); Johnson v. Board of Regents of Univ. of Georgia, 263 F.3d 1234, 1240 (11th Cir. 2001). It changed the system in 1995 to one where, at the second stage of the appraisal process (after the admission and rejection of candidates based solely on academic characteristics), applicants mechanically received .5 points for self-designating as noncaucasian and .25 points for being male (with a score below 5 being sufficient for admission). Johnson, 263 F.3d at 1241 (noting that the files were not read at the second stage, but processed based upon data requested by the application form). Not surprisingly, these admissions systems were found to be unlawful by the Eleventh Circuit. Id. at 1254-64. 

Prior to 1992, and prior to being sued, the University of Texas Law School had a system that placed applicants  [*44]  in one of three categories: presumptive admit, presumptive deny, and discretionary zone. The standards applied to African Americans and Mexican Americans for placement in these categories were dramatically lower than for all other candidates, to the point where the presumptive admit standard for those preferred races was lower than the presumptive deny standard for the non-preferred candidates (primarily whites, Asians, and other Hispanics). The law school color-coded the application files to reflect the applicant's race, reviewed the applications of preferred race candidates with a separate minority admissions subcommittee, and maintained waiting lists segregated by race. Texas defended all of these practices as legitimate under Justice Powell's rationale in Bakke. See Hopwood v. Texas, 78 F.3d 932, 935-38 (5th Cir.), cert. denied, 518 U.S. 1033 (1996); id. at 963; id. at 966 (Weiner, J., concurring) (finding the system "virtually indistinguishable from quotas"). 

In "relying" on Justice Powell's opinion for support of their racial preferences, sometimes universities do not even take care to ensure that precise forms found illegal in Bakke are not copied. The University of Washington School of Law successfully invoked Justice Powell's words to defend a system in effect in 1994 whereby all students with certain "index scores" (composites of LSAT scores and GPA) were sent to an admissions committee for comparative evaluation with other files; but minority candidates were evaluated separately by the Admissions Coordinator. Smith v. University of Washington, Law School, Civ. No. C97-335Z, slip op. at 18 (W.D. Wash. June 5, 2002). In the case pending before this Court involving the University of Michigan's Law School, the law school until 1992 had a program of racial preferences called, like Davis, a "special admissions program." On its face, the policy had a "goal" or "target" of enrolling 10-12% of the class from designated racial and ethnic minority groups ("Black, Chicano, Native American, and mainland Puerto Rican"). In defending its admissions policies under a subsequent written policy adopted in 1992, the law school clearly has sought to  [*45]  disown the "special admissions program," which it operated long after Bakke had been decided. See Final Reply Brief of Appellants 26 & n.11 (vehemently arguing against the assertion of the plaintiff in that case that the policy adopted in 1992 incorporated prior policies; "the 1992 policy eliminated the Law School's previous policies"), filed in Grutter v. Bollinger, 288 F.3d 732 (6th Cir.), cert. granted, 123 S. Ct. 617 (2002) (No. 02-241). 

Elementary and secondary schools have also invoked Justice Powell's analysis to defend large racial preferences in the assignment of students to schools. The City of Boston used a formal set-aside (as always, obligingly called "flexible") to allocate seats on the basis of race and ethnicity to the popular "Boston Latin School." Wessmann v. Gittens, 160 F.3d 790, 793-94 (1st Cir. 1998); id. at 800 (holding policy unconstitutional because it effectively foreclosed competition for some seats based solely on race or ethnicity). The Arlington County Virginia School Board used a statistically weighted lottery to make school assignments on the basis of race. See Tuttle v. Arlington Cty. Sch. Bd., 195 F.3d 698, 701-03 (4th Cir. 1999); id. at 705 (holding systems unconstitutional on narrow-tailoring grounds). The Montgomery County Maryland Public Schools devised a "diversity profile," with assignment of students into one of several formal "categories" determined by racial and ethnic characteristics. Eisenberg v. Montgomery County Public Schools, 197 F.3d 123, 126-27 (4th Cir. 1999); id. at 131-34 (holding preferences unconstitutional on narrow-tailoring grounds). 

The cases discussed above are confined only to those that have been litigated, where discovery has allowed the hidden to be revealed in a manner that is not otherwise "immediately apparent to the public," Bakke, 438 U.S. at 379 (opinion of Brennan, J.), when an educational institution states generally that its use of race and ethnicity in admissions is designed to achieve "diversity" in the manner approved by Justice Powell. But it should be clear that educational institutions have run unrestrained with the use of racial preferences purported to implement only what Justice Powell authorized. This is not reliance. It is  [*46]  licentiousness. In the manner that educational institutions like the University have applied their racial preferences, Justice Powell's rationale is not even recognizable. 

The emphasis on race (and, at the University of Georgia, gender) in these policies demonstrates also that intellectual diversity is hardly their goal. Indeed, when writing for journals and law reviews, many academics candidly admit that their school's interest in diversity is primarily to avoid legal challenge. Peter H. Schuck, Affirmative Action: Past, Present, and Future, 20 YALE L. & POL'Y REV. 1, 34 (2002) ("many of affirmative action's more forthright defenders readily concede that diversity is merely the current rationale of convenience for a policy that they prefer to justify on other grounds"); id. at 28 ("even today when defenders of affirmative action use diversity rhetoric in order to avoid legal pitfalls, the heart of the case for affirmative action is unquestionably its capacity to remedy the current effects of past discrimination"); Jed Rubenfeld, Affirmative Action, 107 YALE L.J. 427, 471 (1997) ("Everyone knows that in most cases a true diversity of perspectives and backgrounds is not really being pursued. (Why no preferences for fundamentalist Christians or for neo-Nazis?)"); Kent Greenawalt, The Unresolved Problems of Reverse Discrimination, 67 CAL. L. REV. 87, 122 (1979) ("I have yet to find a professional academic who believes the primary motivation for preferential admission has been to promote diversity in the student body for the better education of all the students. . . ."); Samuel Issacharoff, Law and Misdirection in the Debate over Affirmative Action, 2002 U. CHI. LEGAL F. 11, 18 (2002) ("I have never heard the term seriously engaged on behalf of a Republican, a fundamentalist Christian, or a Muslim."); Alan M. Dershowitz & Laura Hanft, Affirmative Action And The Harvard College Diversity-Discretion Model: Paradigm Or Pretext, 1 CARDOZO L. REV. 379, 407 (1979) ("The raison d'etre for race-specific affirmative action programs has simply never been diversity for the sake of education. The checkered history of 'diversity' demonstrates that it was designed largely as a cover to achieve other legally, morally, and politically  [*47]  controversial goals. In recent years, it has been invoked - especially by professional schools - as a clever post facto justification for increasing the number of minority group students in the student body."). 

The use of diversity or academic freedom as a legal rationale suggests that colleges and universities have "relied" on Justice Powell's opinion only in the sense that they have "relied" on it as a defense when they are sued (and none too successfully at that). In fact, the use of "diversity" as a rationalization has led to the diminution of integrity in our institutions before the nation and even before this Court. See Samuel Issacharoff, Can Affirmative Action Be Defended?, 59 OHIO ST. L. J. 669, 675 n.14 (1998) ("I remain embarrassed by the claim, not of my authoring but with my name attached nonetheless, that appeared in our reply brief in support of certiorari in Hopwood . . . [that] argued that race operated as simply one of many criteria that went into a selection process - a claim that could not be substantiated by the record and did not comport with the reality of how affirmative action works."). 

Ultimately, what history and the cases bear out is that there is no workable way to employ Justice Powell's framework for the consideration of race and ethnicity in educational admissions. To say that race may be "weighed fairly" or considered "competitively" is to say that there is no real standard at all because it is tied only to the subjective interpretations of those who employ it as the measure for what is permissible. Although not unambiguously set forth in his opinion, a common understanding of Justice Powell's analysis is that race may be used in a modest or "tie-breaking" way. See, e.g., Grutter, 288 F.3d at 817-18 (Gilman, J., dissenting). That common understanding simply does not reflect reality. See Issacharoff, 59 OHIO ST. L. J. at 676 ("Bakke had an unrealistic sense of the extent to which race-consciousness is required even to achieve the Harvard minimum floor of minority representation."). So too, at one time it was even suggested that a program for considering race in the manner suggested by Justice  [*48]  Powell "contained the seed of its own termination." Metro Broadcasting, Inc., 497 U.S. at 596 (referring to the "Harvard admissions program discussed in Bakke"). At this juncture in our history, what is all too clear is that the opposite is true. To permit race to be used as a reason for achieving diversity is much more likely to forever "delay the time when race will become a truly irrelevant, or at least insignificant, factor." Adarand Constructors, Inc., 515 U.S. at 229. 
  
III. The Interests Proffered by the Intervenors Cannot Justify the University's Racial Preferences. 

The district court correctly rejected the separate arguments of the intervenors offered in support of the University's racial preferences. These interests are remedial ones that the district court correctly concluded did not motivate the preferences. Pet. App. 72a-76a. For that reason alone, they could not be compelling interests justifying the preferences. See, e.g., Shaw v. Hunt, 517 U.S. 899, 908 n.4 (1996). Moreover, the intervenors did not point to any identified discrimination by the University as a basis for imposing racial preferences. Instead, they relied on a generalized history or accounts of incidents or circumstances unrelated to admissions policies or practices, many of them remote in time, sometimes dating back decades or longer. Pet. App. 76a-81a. The history evoked by the intervenors is indistinguishable from societal discrimination, which the district court was right to conclude could not justify the racial preferences. Id. at 84a-85a. The same is true with respect to intervenors' contentions regarding an alleged hostile racial climate on campus. Id. at 85a-86a. 

Finally, the intervenors have sought to justify the preferences on the basis of other allegedly discriminatory criteria used by the University in admissions. They made no effort to explain how the preferences for race were related to compensating for other factors considered in the admissions  [*49]  process, and it is not surprising that they would bear no such relationship, since the University did not devise the preferences on this basis. Moreover, as the district court concluded, if the University employs criteria actually having a discriminatory impact on members of some racial or ethnic groups, the narrowly-tailored remedy is the removal of the discriminatory criteria, not the addition of a suspect racial classification. Id. at 88a. The use of racial preference would not diminish liability in any event for other discriminatory criteria. Connecticut v. Teal, 457 U.S. 440 (1982). 
  
IV. The University's Preferences Violate 42 U.S.C. § 1981. 

Petitioners' proof that the University has engaged in intentional discrimination also establishes a violation of 42 U.S.C. § 1981. See General Bldg. Contractors Ass'n v. Pennsylvania, 458 U.S. 375, 383-91 (1982). Although its text, written in the aftermath of the Civil War, suggests that only non-whites are its intended beneficiaries, the Court has held that the statute prohibits discrimination against whites to the same extent as others. See McDonald v. Santa Fe Trail Transp. Co., 427 U.S. 273, 295-96 (1976). Under § 1981(c), the statute's substantive rights are protected from impairment under color of state authority. 

A contract for educational services is a "contract" for purposes of § 1981. Runyon v. McCrary, 427 U.S. 160, 172 (1976). The racial discrimination practiced by the Law School in admissions is a "classic violation of § 1981." Id. 

The University does not offer admission on an "equal basis" to members of all races. Id. On the contrary, as the district court found and the foregoing discussion elaborates, the Law School applies different standards in admission based on race and ethnicity. Section 1981 contains no exceptions to its rule of nondiscrimination. It does not provide, for example, that claimed interests in "diversity" or "academic freedom" excuse unequal treatment on the basis of race under the statute. Indeed, the Court has  [*50]  specifically rejected a number of asserted defenses to the statute based on the exercise of constitutional rights. Id. at 175-79 (rejecting defenses based on the First Amendment rights of freedom of association, parental rights under the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment, and the right of privacy). See also discussion supra at 34. 

CONCLUSION 

For the foregoing reasons, petitioners respectfully request this Court to reverse the judgment entered in favor of the University respondents on petitioners' claims for violations of the Equal Protection Clause, Title VI, and 42 U.S.C. § 1981, and to direct entry of judgment on liability in favor of petitioners on those claims and to remand the case with further proceedings consistent with this Court's opinion. 
