In this case, the plaintiff is asking the Court to reinterpret the American Constitution to the dramatic detriment of black, Latino, and other minority people and women of all races. If  [*8]  the Court does what plaintiff asks, it will resegregate, divide, and polarize our country. The authority of the Court would be compromised. 

Segregation and inequality are increasing in education. Irrespective of the legal forms used to enforce, to maintain, or passively to justify the separate and unequal condition of education at virtually every level, the fact stands as a profound insult and provocation to the minority youth of America and to the best of the nation's legal and political traditions. Minority children are, in their increasing majority, relegated to second-class, segregated schools--today's version of the back of the bus. The very small handful of black, Mexican American, and Native American students who have made it to the front of America's education bus--institutions like the University of Michigan Law School--are now being told by the plaintiff to get out of their seat and move to the back of the bus. 

The demographic fabric of America is changing. By the middle of this century, no racial grouping will be in the majority. America will be a more diverse society; it must not become a more segregated society. We must strive to make equality more, not less, of a reality, or we will surely face renewed social convulsions. 

The movement to defend affirmative action and integration has awakened and stirred into action every sector of this society. What unites these many peoples in defense of affirmative action is the conviction that the Constitution's pledge of equality should have meaning and currency in our collective American future. Our progress as a nation depends on the realization of this prospect. 

 [*9]  ARGUMENT 

I. THE FUNDAMENTAL QUESTION BEFORE THE COURT IS HOW TO UNITE THE NATION UNDER THE CONSTITUTION 

A. Our Constitution cannot unite our nation if it is converted into a document that sanctions racial discrimination in the name of a false standard of equality 

The case before the Court goes to the heart of the Constitution and the central defining issues of American history. It raises the central question faced by the original framers of the Constitution: how to create a united nation out of many peoples. 

It is this question--how to unite the nation--over which the student intervenors disagree fundamentally with plaintiff Barbara Grutter and her attorneys, working with the Center for Individual Rights (CIR). The original framers' most important debates centered on this question. The Constitution they devised was essentially a set of agreed-on principles, formulated through a series of critical compromises, aimed at uniting into a single stable national society a people organized in 13 states, each proud, protective, and jealous of its own prerogatives, and divided between two already increasingly polarized economic systems, one free and the other slave. The centrality of this question is suggested in the fact that, even before the constitution was ratified, three of the greatest founders, John Adams, Benjamin Franklin, and Thomas Jefferson, proposed that the Great Seal of the United States bear the Latin motto E Pluribus Unum--out of many, one. n4 On the Seal a fierce eagle clutches this motto in its beak, as if the American bird has just snatched this precious unity from the perils of history. 

n4 Van Alstyne, Trends in the Supreme Court: Mr. Jefferson's Crumbling Wall--A Comment on Lynch v. Donnelly, 1984 Duke L.J. 770, 773. 

 [*10]  Yet, in the midst of their work of national unification, the framers sanctioned and seemed prepared to perpetuate, along with the division between slave and free, a division between black and white that would come to dominate the first epoch of the new republic's politics and threaten over and over to tear it apart. 

In 1978, in his impassioned and sometimes bitter opinion in Regents of the University of California v. Bakke, 438 U.S. 265 (1978)--the case whose much-contested principles now come once more before this Court for definitive interpretation--Justice Thurgood Marshall sums up the ironies in this moment of creation of the American republic in unequivocal and provocative terms.
  
In their declaration of the principles that were to provide the cornerstone of the new Nation, therefore, the Framers made it plain that "we the people," for whose protection the Constitution was designed, did not include those whose skins were the wrong color.
  
Bakke, 438 U.S. at 389. 

Justice Marshall goes back even further, to the fundamental principles enunciated at the moment of the nation's birth in its founding document in 1776.
  
The denial of human rights was etched into the American Colonies' first attempts at establishing self-government. When the colonists determined to seek their independence from England, they drafted a unique document cataloguing their grievances against the King and proclaiming as "self-evident" that "all men are created equal" and are endowed "with certain unalienable Rights," including those to "Life, Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness." The self-evident truths and the unalienable rights were intended, however, to apply only to white men.
  
Bakke, 438 U.S. at 388. 

It is entirely in the spirit of the fundamental difference between the student intervenors and the plaintiff that the  [*11]  essential inequalities Justice Marshall identified in these two documents at the foundation of the American legal and political tradition are, in a certain sense, invisible in the texts themselves. Jefferson's Declaration proclaims "all men are created equal" as a universal principle. The Constitution makes no explicit reference to race, and the framers appear to have fastidiously avoided the word slavery in the document, as if they were ashamed of what they were doing as they did it, in particular in those passages plainly aimed at entrenching the right to slave property in the new republic's legal system. In the parlance of the plaintiff, both documents were perfectly "colorblind." 

In extensive testimony at trial on behalf of the student intervenors and in an expert report submitted on behalf of the University, distinguished historian Eric Foner offered, on the basis of a lifetime of scholarship studying these issues, support and explanation for Justice Marshall's provocative perceptions.
  
The mental picture that existed of this country from the very beginning among the people who were creating it was of a society of . . . white people, a racial definition of nationhood. . . . 
  
. . . in a country that prides itself on its devotion to liberty as we do in the Declaration of Independence, in a country founded on the principle that all people are created equal, what justification exists for slavery? The only justification is a justification of racial inferiority. So in a contradictory way, the very emphasis on freedom and equality which the Revolution generates also generates a very severe form of racism to justify the exclusion of blacks from these rights which are proclaimed to be the rights of all mankind. So that you have the growth of democracy and egalitarianism and the intensification of racism going hand-in-hand from the Revolution all the way up to the Civil War to defend  [*12]  slavery but also to defend the boundary which excludes blacks from the rights enjoyed by white Americans.
  
CAJA 8422. 

The beautiful and abstract universal principles of Jefferson and Madison, the hallowed principles of freedom and equality, were, in our origins, inseparable from and indeed employed as a very basis for the justification of slavery, racism, and inequality. Justice Marshall sums this up as a conflict between "abstract equality" and "genuine equality." 

It is the contention of the students that the plaintiff in this case seeks to return American Constitutional law, not, of course, to the days of slavery, but to a time nevertheless when a bloodless and lifeless principle of "abstract equality" could be used to cover and sanction the reality of the denial of "genuine equality" to millions of our fellow citizens. For these founding documents, in all their abstractness so deeply implicated in the sanction of slavery and racism provide, from the standpoint of the plaintiff, perfect examples of the sort of "colorblindness" the plaintiff would like to impose on this Court and reimpose on American history. 

What both Justice Marshall and Professor Foner understand is that what has given life to the great American principles is not the dogmatism of those like the plaintiff in this case, for whom no equality is permissible except as an abstraction. From "all men are created equal" to "equal protection of the laws" is not the story of how one logical abstraction led to another. It is a development that came out of a history of suffering and struggle to create equality and justice where inequality and injustice prevailed before, a living struggle that has redefined the great words of the nation's history in the process of trying to making them living realities. 

In Professor Foner's words,
  
The origins of the idea of an American people unbounded by race lies not with the founders, who by and  [*13]  large made their peace with slavery, but with the abolitionists. The anti-slavery crusade insisted on the "Americanness" of slaves and free blacks, and maintained that birthplace, not race, should determine who was an American . . . [the idea] later enshrined in the Fourteenth Amendment. . .
  
CAJA 2647. 

The unity based on abstract conceptions of freedom and equality came apart on the battlefields of the U.S. Civil War, as brother fought brother in America's bloodiest conflict, proving in life-or-death struggle the truth of Lincoln's assertion that "a house divided against itself cannot stand," that America could not be united as both slave and free. n5 

n5 Lincoln, "House Divided" Speech at Springfield, Illinois, in Lincoln, Speeches and Writings, 1832-1858, 426 (Fehrenbacher, ed. 1989). 

The victory of the Union and freedom in the Civil War fundamentally redefined the unity of the nation. The nation could no longer be united on the basis of a compromise with slavery, wrapped up in an abstract assertion of freedom, nor on the basis of an abstract equality whose reality rested on black slavery and all the inequalities that flowed from it. In a shining moment at Gettysburg Lincoln declared the new reality in deathless words. In the Thirteenth, Fourteenth, and Fifteenth Amendments, legislators sought to give Constitutional expression to the historic change wrought, in reality, by those who, on and off the battlefield, had given "the last full measure of devotion" to the cause of Union, freedom, and equality. n6 

n6 Lincoln, Address at Gettysburg, Pennsylvania, in Lincoln, Speeches and Writings, 1859-1865, 536 (Fehrenbacher, ed. 1989). 

As the abolitionists' vision of the nation began to become a reality, Jefferson's abstract principle of equality, redefined by war and emancipation, placed by Lincoln at the roots of the national purpose, became a hammer to strike the chains from the limbs of black men, women, and children. As this change  [*14]  in the nation's real conditions of day-to-day life found legal expression in the Fourteenth Amendment and a series of civil rights and Reconstruction measures, the rights of citizenship proclaimed in the Constitution and Bill of Rights became, in principle, real protections for the privileged and oppressed alike, to be enforced in all the states, as need arose, by the federal courts. 

This historical moment, however, was tragically short-lived. Justice Marshall sums up this next chapter in the history of American "colorblindness" in his opinion in Bakke.
  
Despite the passage of the Thirteenth, Fourteenth, and Fifteenth Amendments, the Negro was systematically denied the rights those Amendments were supposed to secure. The combined actions and inactions of the State and Federal Governments maintained Negroes in a position of legal inferiority for another century after the Civil War. . . . 
  
...Reconstruction came to a close, and, with the assistance of this Court, the Negro was rapidly stripped of his new civil rights. In the words of C. Vann Woodward: "By narrow and ingenious interpretation [the Supreme Court's] decisions over a period of years had whittled away a great part ot the authority presumably given the government for protection of civil rights."
  
Bakke, 438 U.S. at 390-391. 

There follows Justice Marshall's review of this legal history, in which "the Court strangled Congress' efforts to use its power to promote racial equality" and characterized civil rights protections as a matter of treating black citizens as the "special favorite" of the laws--as if echoing the plaintiff's brief in this case on the question of so-called "preferences": "The Court's ultimate blow to the Civil War Amendments and the equality of Negroes came in Plessy. . . . ignoring totally the realities of the positions of the two races. . . ." Bakke, 438 U.S. at 392. 

In Plessy the Court achieved a high point in embracing the sort of abstract "equality" that the plaintiff would like to  [*15]  impose in the present case. Over Justice Harlan's famous dissent, the Plessy Court used the words of equality to ensure a reality of increasing inequality in declaring "separate but equal" to be Constitutional. Plessy v. Ferguson, 163 U.S. 537 (1896). 

With Plessy, the nation had tragically returned to the policy of attempting to unite itself on the basis of an abstract theory of equality ("separate but equal"), the reality of which was the deepening division of the nation along the lines of racial segregation. The principle of "equality" that segregated black citizens inevitably came to justify applying the principle of "separate but equal" to measures aimed at dividing all nonwhite from white Americans. Nor was the purpose of this abstract "equality" difficult to discern. Its aim was to reentrench the old white privilege--and not only in the South--over against the newly enfranchised black citizens, who, in their separateness, would remain perpetually unequal. As Mexican Americans and Chinese and other Asian Americans emerged as growing factors in various regions and sectors of the nation's economy, similar attitudes found expression in similar practices of ghettoization, segregation, and second-class citizenship imposed on these nonwhite Americans as well. 

The Jim Crow period was characterized by a constant process of improvisation, not least in the law and in court decisions. At trial, Professor John Hope Franklin, dean of the field of American black history, emphasized that in his own life he had been forced to appreciate "the inconsistency and the remarkable ingenuity . . . of racial discrimination [on the part] of those who practiced it. . . And I came to the conclusion that the maintenance of [white supremacy] was so important that they didn't mind being inconsistent. They didn't mind being improvisational. . . ." CAJA 7933-7934, 7942. 

It was against this historical background, after the labor and social upheavals of the 1930s, the New Deal, and the  [*16]  "judicial revolution" of 1937, that this Court finally, in 1954, declared, in Brown v. Board of Education, 347 U.S. 483 (1954), that "in the field of public education the doctrine of 'separate but equal' has no place," and that the plaintiffs in Brown were "by reason of the segregation complained of, deprived of the equal protection of the laws guaranteed by the Fourteenth Amendment." Brown, 347 U.S. at 495. Building on a handful of earlier decisions, with the decisive stroke of Brown, this Court seemed to restore the Fourteenth Amendment to its original meaning. The Brown Court repudiated the project, implicit in the logic of Plessy, of uniting the nation on the basis of the legal falsehood of an "abstract equality," the reality of which was the institutionalized racism and inequality of segregation. The nation was to be united, not on the basis of segregation rationalized and sustained by "abstract equality," but on the basis of the integration of its diverse races and peoples through a reaching out in the direction of, in Justice Marshall's words, "genuine equality." 

Formally, the 1954 finding in Brown was not at issue in Bakke, as Justice Marshall understood perfectly well. The Court in 1978, though split sharply over the issues in Bakke, stood in its entirety on Brown. Yet Justice Marshall felt he had to look beyond the formality of the legal issues before the Court in Bakke to the implications for American society in the decision the Court was making. At the beginning of his opinion he makes the sweeping reference to "200 years" of the Court's failure to understand the Constitution as prohibiting "the most ingenious and pervasive forms of discrimination." Bakke, 438 U.S. at 387. 

In the body of his opinion he reviews the betrayals and broken promises of the post-Reconstruction period. When he comments on the opposition to affirmative action within the Court in the matter at hand, he seems to hear about his brother Justices' ears the shouts of the white mobs in Boston threatening black children boarding buses to integrate  [*17]  Boston's public schools. He concludes with bitterly prophetic words.
  
I fear that we have come full circle. After the Civil War our Government started several "affirmative action" programs. This Court in the Civil Rights Cases and Plessy v. Ferguson destroyed the movement toward complete equality. For almost a century no action was taken, and this nonaction was with the tacit approval of the courts. Then we had Brown v. Board of Education and the Civil Rights Acts of Congress, followed by numerous affirmative-action programs. Now, we have this Court again stepping in, this time to stop affirmative-action programs of the type used by the University of California.
  
Bakke, 438 U.S. at 402. 

In the years since 1978, Justice Powell's decision in Bakke has proven to be, if not the strong basis on which to sustain the movement toward an America united through integration Justice Marshall argued for, also surely not a decision that has "destroyed the movement toward complete equality." Bakke, 438 U.S. at 402. Rather, the Court's decision has proven to be one of those conservative compromises that others have claimed Americans have a genius for. From the standpoint of the student intervenors and those they have spoken for in this case, Justice Powell's decision is an inadequate one, a decision that helped slow down progress towards "genuine equality," even helped set it back to a certain extent, but did not halt it. To most Americans, uniting the nation on the basis of Justice Powell's conception of diversity merged easily with the aspirations inspired by Brown to unite the nation on the basis of integration. The methods of unification might have been constrained, but the progress toward an integrated nation could continue, slowed down, on the indirect paths Justice Powell had sanctioned even if not on the direct road to freedom. Even with all its limitations, the student intervenors must insist that Justice Powell's decision has met the test of history. It deserves to be sustained. 

 [*18]  It is for this very reason that the plaintiff must seek the reversal of the Bakke decision itself, in the name of one of those dogmatic, abstract conceptions of equality that throughout American history has been used to sanction and sustain "the most ingenious and pervasive forms" of inequality between our peoples. The students regard the plaintiff's case as merely the latest example of the "improvisational" and "ingenious" character of racism John Hope Franklin spoke of at trial, wrapped up yet again in one of those concepts of what Justice Marshall refers to as "abstract equality" substituted for the "genuine equality" the Brown decision represents in American Constitutional history, as in the aspirations of the great majority of all Americans of all races. 

B. The plaintiff's case rests on the false premise that the LSAT is a "colorblind" and non-discriminatory standard of equality 

In fact, the real-world basis of the plaintiff's case is one of the most "ingenious and pervasive" of those abstract standards of "equality" in recent American history: the standardized test that determines who shall and who shall not have access to higher education, in this case access to one of the nation's finest law schools. For the whole of the plaintiff's argument rests on the demonstrably false premise that the LSAT, combined with undergraduate grades, is a fair and "equal" standard for admission to the University of Michigan Law School. Without this premise, Barbara Grutter and the Center for Individual Rights have no case. 

At trial, the student intervenors demonstrated, with a series of expert witnesses, the discriminatory character of the LSAT. The evidence presented to prove the bias of this test against black, Latino, and Native American students was largely uncontested. The biases of the LSAT have long been known. The University of Michigan Law School has been well aware of them. The University never defended the  [*19]  LSAT against the specific allegations of bias offered by the intervenors. Nor, obviously, did the student intervenors seek to condemn the University for this historically well established discriminatory character of the LSAT and therefore of its primary admissions criteria--and for a simple reason. The Law School has sought, throughout the recent period, to offset these biases by means of its modest affirmative action policies. The results are not spectacular, but they are positive and important. The discrimination otherwise inescapable in its admissions system is to some extent compensated for by the consideration of race among students already qualified for admission to a school with far more qualified applicants than it is able to accept. 

The student intervenors contend that the Law School has the Constitutional right--as well as the civic duty--to implement voluntary measures to offset the discriminatory impact of its own admissions criteria. 

However much the plaintiff has sought to evade the question, her case must rise or fall on the truth of the assertion that the LSAT is a test that does not discriminate. That assertion is palpably false. All the tricks of plaintiff's statistician, Kinley Larntz, all those impressive-looking grids, and all the statistician's jargon boil down to a single falsehood, for all are based on a formula that itself discriminates against black, Latino, and Native American students. The Law School, to its credit, uses its affirmative-action policies, modest in the extreme as they are, to undo some portion of the odious impact that its two main admissions criteria would otherwise have on the fairness of its admissions process as well as the diversity of its student body. 

Over against this modest engagement with reality, the plaintiff demands that real measures of equality must cease so that its abstract and false standard of equality, the LSAT, may take their place. Barbara Grutter demands that real discrimination against minority applicants be reestablished and given  [*20]  the sanction of the Constitution so that a false equality may be enshrined in the law to protect white privilege. 

The United States' brief in this case is more moderate in form than the plaintiff's: the United States does not demand the reversal of the Bakke ruling. But the United States' demand is the same in substance and more dishonest intellectually. 

In suggesting, in effect, that this Court might uphold Bakke but overturn the Law School's affirmative action policies, the United States invites this Court to reduce the political flack an anti-affirmative action decision might arouse. The United States is dishonest in failing to acknowledge the importance of the considerable difference in method and conception between the University's affirmative action measures at its Law School and the measures at issue in Gratz v. Bollinger (No. 02-516). The student intervenors, of course, regard the affirmative action policies at issue in Gratz as clearly constitutional. But as both the University and the intervenors make clear, the measures of affirmative action employed by the Law School are exceptionally minimal, their tailoring to Justice Powell's ruling extremely deliberate and strict. To uphold Justice Powell's decision while overturning the Law School's policies is to render the Bakke decision a dead letter while pretending to keep it alive. It is a cynical politician's decision on how to make it through the next election, not a decision worthy of the nation's highest judicial body. 

The immediate practical question facing the Court is whether to sustain a compromise--as stated above, a conservative compromise--and, if it is to be sustained, how to interpret it. It should be obvious how much the genuine sustaining of Justice Powell's painfully reasoned decision would mean to Kimberly James and the other student intervenors: it would mean at least a partial recognition by the nation's highest legal tribunal that their worth as people and citizens and their right to serve their nation as lawyers and leaders cannot be defined by the discriminatory standard  [*21]  embodied in the LSAT--that the University of Michigan Law School has been right to attempt, to some degree, to treat them as whole and unique individuals. 

C. This Court should not turn reality upside down 

Both the United States and the plaintiff address this Court in the name of a "colorblind" standard for university and college admissions. The University and the student intervenors, too, yearn for a truly colorblind society. It would be a fine thing indeed if, in reality, this meant that all parties to this contentious legal dispute agreed on this basic principle. 

But the sort of "equality" urged by the plaintiff on the Court is to be found only in the grave. For the truth is that "colorblind," like many of the most important words in our nation's history, has meant different things in different contexts and in the mouths of different people. When Justice Thurgood Marshall quotes Justice Harlan's dissent in Plessy and reminds his colleagues that "the majority of the Court rejected the principle of colorblindness . . . for the next 58 years," Bakke, 438 U.S. at 401, he is obviously expressing his lifelong opposition to the discrimination inherent in the "colorblind" principle of "separate but equal." When the plaintiff speaks of "colorblindness" and means the false equality of the LSAT, with its now well established history of excluding minority students from legal education, the term "colorblind" has merely become a code word for segregation and resegregation. 

Our nation has evolved over the course of its long journey through history since 1776--most Americans would surely say, overall, for the better. Jim Crow was not the same as slavery. Something had still been gained that was never lost. And today's discrimination is not exactly the same as Jim Crow. But the LSAT and similar false abstract standards of equality are today's equivalent, under today's conditions, of those supposedly "race-neutral" measures that were an inherent part of the 'ingenious improvisation' of our segregationist  [*22]  past. The student intervenors may realistically assume that almost all Americans are grateful that today's discrimination comes, for the most part, without thugs in hoods, burning crosses, and lynchings--and without a governor in the schoolhouse door. But segregation and discrimination are still segregation and discrimination. It is nearly thirty years since Justice Douglas, in DeFunis v. Odegaard, 416 U.S. 312 (1974), urged the University of Washington Law School to eliminate the LSAT because of its discriminatory bias against minority applicants. DeFunis, 416 U.S. at 340 (Douglas, J., dissenting). Yet today the plaintiff urges a course of action that would enshrine the LSAT as the very Constitutional definition of equality and calls measures to offset the test's racial biases "discrimination." 

Reality is indeed in danger of being turned upside down. 

D. The Constitution and Brown should not be perverted into the legal basis for a system of de facto segregation 

At the beginning of his opinion, Justice Marshall declares, "when a state acts to remedy the effects of that legacy of discrimination, I cannot believe that this same Constitution stands as a barrier." Bakke, 438 U.S. at 387. This is both a desperate cry of protest and a brave assertion of optimism in the potential of American republicanism to be a part of "the movement toward complete equality." Bakke, 438 U.S. at 402. The students share Justice Marshall's apprehension that he might be at a tragic moment in the fight to unite the nation on the basis of integration and "genuine equality." And the students share his passionate refusal to give up even in the face of the possibility of tragic defeat. 

Both the United States and the plaintiff ask this Court and the American people to declare the main function of Brown in American history to be preparing the way to replace a Southern system of de jure segregation of black and white with a national system of de facto segregation of white from  [*23]  black, Latino, and Native American--a system to be declared untouchable by legal remedies. The student intervenors call on this Court to reject this demand to "unite" the nation by sanctioning its deepening division by race. 

II. THE CONSTITUTION AUTHORIZES THE UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN TO ADOPT AFFIRMATIVE ACTION POLICIES TO ASSURE THAT ITS LAW SCHOOL HAS A RACIALLY DIVERSE AND INTEGRATED STUDENT BODY 

A. This Court has long recognized that local educational authorities may take racially conscious steps to integrate public educational institutions 

In 1954, this Court held that ". . . in the field of public education, the doctrine of 'separate but equal' has no place." Brown, 347 U.S. at 495. 

Even if the resources devoted to separate schools were equivalent--which they never were--separate schools were "inherently unequal." They denied black students those intangible elements in education that "are incapable of objective measurement but which make for greatness . . .". Brown, 347 U.S. at 493, citing Sweatt v. Painter, 339 U.S. 629, 634 (1950). They limited black students' opportunity to "study, to engage in discussions and exchange views with other students, and, in general, to learn. . ." Brown, 347 U.S. at 493. 

Brown recognized that the effect of segregated schools extended beyond educational inequality. Segregated education denied black people full citizenship rights: it was based on and reinforced the lie of white superiority and black inferiority. By their very existence, separate schools "generate[] a feeling of inferiority in [black students] as to their status in the community that may affect their hearts and minds in a way unlikely to ever be undone." Brown, 347 U.S. at 494. Only fully integrated education could defeat the  [*24]  baseless racist stigma of black inferiority; only fully integrated schools could break down the institutional racism that stood as a bar to democracy. 

While the plaintiff cynically quotes Brown and even claims to stand on it, she fundamentally misrepresents the Brown decision. Brown did not merely call on the government to issue an abstract endorsement of equality; it asserted that equality could only be achieved when black and white children actually went to school together. While acknowledging the more pernicious character of segregation enforced by law, Brown attacked both de jure and de facto segregation:
  
"Segregation of white and colored children in public schools has a detrimental effect upon the colored children" [and] "The impact is greater when it has the sanction of the law."
  
Brown, 347 U.S. at 494 (emphasis added). 

Brown required the end of legal segregation and authorized government action to end de facto segregation. 

Enforcing the letter and spirit of Brown presented an unprecedented challenge to the nation. In the wake of the Brown decision, battles to integrate Southern education extended from the doors of Little Rock's Central High School to the gates of Ole Miss. Inspired by the Brown decision, a growing youth-led civil rights movement fought to realize the promise of integration. Despite deep and prolonged segregationist opposition, by 1963, the civil rights movement had begun to transform the South. 

In that summer, in the wake of Dr. Martin Luther King's stunning victory in Birmingham, Alabama, the proud, determined ranks of the increasingly integrated and powerful movement brought the fight for integration and equality to the North. The 1963 Civil Rights March on Washington gave notice to every part of the local, state, and federal governments and to the citizens of the nation that the struggle for  [*25]  integration would take on de facto segregation in the North as well as de jure segregation in the South. 

After the March on Washington, state and local governments in the North adopted a variety of race-conscious laws designed to end de facto segregation. Federal and state courts repeatedly held that the state and local legislative bodies had the power to enact such measures. n7 Reflecting that consensus, in 1971, every Justice assumed that local educational authorities could take racially conscious measures to end the de facto segregation of the public schools:
  
[Local school boards] are charged with broad power to formulate and implement educational policy and might well conclude, for example, that in order to prepare students to live in a pluralistic society each school should have a prescribed ratio of Negro to white students reflecting the proportion for the district as a whole.
  
Swann v. Charlotte Mecklenberg Bd of Educ, 402 U.S. 1, 16 (1971). 

n7 See, e.g., Offerman v. Nitkowski, 378 F.2d 22, 24 (CA2 1967). Springfield School District v. Barksdale, 348 F.2d 261, 266 (CA1 1965) (Aldrich, CJ); Tometz v. Bd. of Educ., Waukegan City School District No. 1, 39 Ill.2d 593, 597 (1968) ("State laws or administrative policies, directed toward the reduction and eventual elimination of de facto segregation of children . . . have been approved by every high State court which has considered the issue"). 

By the mid-1960's, the struggle to desegregate education had extended from K-12 education to colleges, universities, and professional schools. Brown was based on decisions striking down 'separate but equal' in graduate schools, and in turn this Court applied the fundamental principles of Brown to higher education by requiring Southern universities to take affirmative steps to end Jim Crow segregation. United States v. Fordice, 505 U.S. 717, 734-738 (1992). 

As the Court recognized, in higher education, admission criteria performed the same function as district lines and pupil  [*26]  assignment plans in secondary and elementary education. They determined whether blacks and whites went to school together--or whether there were separate and unequal colleges, universities, and law schools. The University of Mississippi, like many Southern universities, adopted the ACT test as a means to keep black students out. The Court struck that practice down and ordered the University to admit black students with significantly lower scores because that was needed for desegregation and because the Court held that the tests by themselves were too discriminatory and had too little ability to predict how a student could actually perform. Fordice, 505 U.S. at 734-738. 

From at least 1868 forward, the University of Michigan Law School had not practiced de jure segregation. But as described above, in the 1960s, it was a classic example of de facto segregation. And it was not alone: every Northern law school was essentially all-white well into the 1960s. In the fall of 1965, Boalt Hall, Michigan, NYU and UCLA together had a total of four black students out of a total enrollment of 4843 students. n8 

n8 Kidder, The Struggle for Access at 11. 

The combined struggles of the civil rights movement, the student-led anti-Vietnam War movement, and black youth uprisings in the inner cities led to the creation and expansion of affirmative action programs in universities and law schools throughout the nation. By 1966, at Michigan, as elsewhere, leading faculty members and administrators had recognized the need for change. After an intense debate, the faculty at the Law School concluded that it could not end de facto segregation without using racially conscious measures to do so. CAJA 4854-4856. 

At Michigan, as elsewhere, some faculty members objected. But no faculty member questioned the legal authority of the University to adopt the racially conscious measures  [*27]  needed to desegregate. As this Court did in Swann, the law faculties and universities of the nation assumed that their actions fell well within the scope of their authority and that their actions furthered an interest that was vital to the future of the nation. The elected University of Michigan Regents agreed, repeatedly ratifying the Law School's use of affirmative action measures. The 1978 Bakke decision based on Brown and Sweatt left no doubt that the Law School was well within its rights. 

In asserting that the Fourteenth Amendment should prevent the University of Michigan and its elected Board of Regents from using racially conscious measures to integrate the Law School, plaintiff asks this Court to depart radically from precedent and from basic principles of separation of powers. First, plaintiff disregards the special authority of educational entities to desegregate. But even as to the contracting cases the plaintiff would wrongly apply here, she urges a sharp change in the law without acknowledging she is doing so. She argues that under those precedents public universities and other entities may only adopt race-conscious means to remedy their own prior unlawful discrimination--that is, that they may only bring race to bear when they are legally required to do so. This approach confuses limitations on the judiciary with limitations on administrative and legislative bodies. It is true that the courts do not have the power to order race-conscious remedies absent a showing of unlawful race discrimination. It does not follow that other branches of government may not do so; in fact, they may. See, e.g., Adarand Constructors, Inc. v. Pena, 515 U.S. 200 (1995) at 237; City of Richmond v. J.A. Croson, Co., 488 U.S. 469, 492 (1989) (O'Connor, J.); Id., 488 U.S. at 519 (Kennedy, J., concurring in part and concurring in the judgment). 

She asks that this Court use the Fourteenth Amendment to prevent elected Regents from taking steps to maintain the desegregation of a public university. If she prevails, de facto segregation will be given the same Constitutional protection  [*28]  that Plessy v. Ferguson gave to de jure segregation. Even in the schools--which have long been said to be engines of opportunity and democracy--state action to achieve integration will be barred. American society, already deeply segregated and divided, will become more so; integration at colleges and universities will end; segregation in secondary and elementary education will increase; increased segregation will spread throughout society; and the shining moment that was Brown will be only a memory, for in practice, Brown will be a dead letter. 

B. In Bakke, this Court approved the universities' use of racially conscious admission criteria to achieve a racially diverse student body 

Affirmative action worked. At Michigan, as across the country, the number of black, Latino and Native American students increased dramatically. As is undisputed, those students were highly qualified and went on to practice with great success. As is also undisputed, white students reaped undeniable benefits from the integrated legal education that they received. Legal education and the legal profession gained from the modest amounts of integration and diversity achieved through affirmative action. 

But in the wake of the attacks on school busing in Pontiac, Michigan, and Boston, there were a few, like the plaintiff, who objected when blacks and other minorities finally had the chance to go to the universities. In 1976, Alan Bakke, a white student who had been rejected by twelve medical schools, sued the University of California at Davis Medical School, claiming that his constitutional and statutory rights had been violated by the "preferences" given to black and other minority students. The Supreme Court of California sustained his challenge and ordered the elimination of any conscious consideration of the race of applicants to California's universities. Bakke v. Regents of the University of California, 18 Cal.3d 34 (1976). 

 [*29]  In 1978, a majority of this Court reversed that order. Justices Brennan, White, Marshall, and Blackmun joined with Justice Powell in holding that ". . . the State has a substantial interest that may legitimately be served by a properly devised admissions program involving the consideration of race and ethnic origin." Bakke, 438 U.S. at 320. In that compromise, all five Justices joined in approving affirmative action programs, like those at Harvard College, that had as their central elements (1) an explicit recognition that the school would consider the race of the applicants, (2) an explicit recognition that the school would admit students from underrepresented groups with lower grades and test scores than rejected white applicants; and (3) an explicit recognition that the school would admit sufficient numbers of black and other minority students to accomplish the goal of actually achieving a racially diverse student body. 

Taken together, the opinions clearly recognized a compelling state interest in integrating the universities. Following the reasoning of Brown, Justices Brennan, White, Marshall, and Blackmun held that integrating the campuses was necessary to assure equal education for blacks and other minorities. Standing on the achievement of Brown, Justice Powell held that a racially diverse student body was important to students of all races and to the nation as a whole. 

Justices Brennan, White, Marshall, and Blackmun held that ". . . Davis' goal of admitting minority students disadvantaged by the effects of past discrimination is sufficiently important to justify use of race-conscious admissions criteria." Bakke, 438 U.S. at 369. The experience that this Court and the Nation had gained from trying to implement Brown had taught two lessons. First, progress requires resisting rather than appeasing white mob pressure, and second, winning support for integration from the vast majority of white Americans is possible simply by implementing concrete  [*30]  measures to bring about integration and then giving those measures time to work:
  
A productive and happy life is not something that you find; it is something that you make. And so the ability of Negroes and whites to work together, to understand each other, will not be found ready made; it must be created by the fact of contact. n9


n9 King, Where Do We Go From Here: Chaos or Community? at 33 (1967) 

Given this nation's history, upending segregation "root and branch" required persistence, determination, and a long-term commitment. But change was possible. Indeed, in the short time between Brown and Bakke, American society had changed dramatically and for the better. But the progress was still young and fragile. 

Justice Powell's decision in Bakke stood squarely on the side of advancing the aims of Brown. By holding that the "attainment of a diverse student body," including a racially diverse student body, was "clearly a constitutionally permissible goal," his opinion kept the door of progress open. However, Justice Powell's rationale for supporting affirmative action programs--protecting the First Amendment right of universities to select a student body of their choosing to promote learning--left affirmative action policies more vulnerable to legal and political attack. Defending integration on First Amendment grounds placed the use of race-conscious measures in university admissions in a legally sui generis category; obscured affirmative action's fundamental nature as a means of achieving integration and equality; and left university administrations with only a single partial, but nonetheless true defense for their use of race-based admissions policies--intellectual diversity. 

By explicitly recognizing the right of universities to use affirmative action programs as desegregation measures, this Court can sanction the right of universities to continue  [*31]  equalizing educational opportunity, can make universities more accountable to the public, and can provide much needed protection of the gains towards integration this society has made. 

C. This Court should reaffirm Bakke 

The plaintiff, joined by the United States, has a second request, no less dangerous than her first: she asks that this Court preserve Bakke in name but overrule it in practice by striking down the Law School plan. 

There neither is, nor can be, any plan that more clearly complies with Bakke. Its text comes from Bakke; it operates as Bakke required; and if it cannot pass muster, no plan can. The plaintiff mounts but two attacks on the plan, either of which, if adopted, would mean the practical end of affirmative action. 

She first argues, almost in passing, that the Law School gives too much of a "preference." There is no preference. But the plaintiff wants the right to go into court every time the average difference in LSAT scores exceeds some unspecified level. The federal courts would have to set up shop in admissions offices--and affirmative action would be gone, along with the autonomy of the universities. 

The plaintiff's second and main claim, joined by the United States, is that the Law School plan is the "functional equivalent of a quota." The plaintiff seizes the phrase from Bakke and twists its meaning beyond recognition. Justice Powell defined a quota as a rigid number that insulated students from competition and undermined individualized assessment. But short of that rigid line, he recognized that universities would have to pay "attention to numbers" to actually achieve diversity. Bakke, 438 U.S. at 323. The line, he declared, was fine, but "[a] boundary line . . . is none the worse for being narrow." Bakke, 438 U.S. at 318. 

Because Justice Powell was concerned to protect the autonomy of the universities, he held that if the plan is  [*32]  facially valid, the school is entitled to a presumption of good faith. The plaintiff can only overcome that presumption by meeting the high standards for proving unlawful intent under the Fourteenth Amendment. Bakke, 438 U.S. at 318-319, citing, inter alia, Arlington Heights v. Metropolitan Housing Dev Corp, 429 U.S. 252 (1977); see also id. at 319 n.53 

The plaintiff does not mention, much less attempt to meet, this burden. She argued for and the district court found a quota based on admissions that it variously described as from 10 to 12 percent or 10 to 17 percent of the class; and she argued for and the dissent below found a quota based on data from the years 1995-1998 alone. Br. of U.S., at 22-23. 

But these numbers show nothing. The number of residents of Ohio admitted to the Law School is doubtless stable from year to year--and there is no Ohio quota. For minority students, where the University has the authority to monitor the numbers and reason to do so, the numbers admitted would normally be even more stable without there ever being a quota. 

The United States finally recognizes that it is necessary to redefine a quota in order to find one. Having first asserted that the University had a "rigid numerical target that amounts to a quota," the United States then asserted that the fact that the Law School's "target may be a range rather than a fixed percentage does not make it any less a quota." As support for this redefinition, the United States cites a case defining the term "quota" under the nation's fishing laws. Br. of U.S., at 23, citing Fisherman's Dock Coop., Inc v. Brown, 75 F.3d 164 (4th Cir 1996). 

Whatever the meaning of a quota is under the fishing laws, a "range" is not the line that Justice Powell established--nor that was established in any discrimination case decided by this Court. In addition, plaintiff ignores the presumption of good faith to which the University is entitled and all the pertinent testimony by the Law School's faculty and administrators  [*33]  to the effect that even a target range--which would be permissible under Bakke--is not in operation at the Law School. Bakke, 438 U.S. at 318-319. 

If the definition of a quota proposed by the plaintiff and the United States were adopted, the narrow but crucial line that Justice Powell established would be obliterated. Every time a School admitted a minority student, it would have to look over its shoulder to see if the numbers could be twisted into "evidence" of a quota. Many colleges would abandon affirmative action; many others would drastically cut back minority admissions. The result would be disastrous--and dishonest. In name, Bakke would live; in deed, it would be dead--and with it legal authority for taking action to prevent the resegregation of the nation's campuses. 

D. This Court should reaffirm Bakke to avoid the immediate resegregation of legal education and the eventual resegregation of the profession 

The impact of such a decision has been projected as disastrous; black enrollment would plummet by 75% nationwide. But in point of fact, projections are not required; the disastrous effects of eliminating affirmative action have already been revealed in unfortunate social experiments in California, Texas, and Florida. 

In 1995, the UC Board of Regents voted to eliminate the use of affirmative action policies throughout the UC System. This action was followed in 1996 by the passage of Proposition 209, which outlawed the use of affirmative action programs throughout the State of California. In 1995, the Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals in the notorious Hopwood decision struck down the use of affirmative action programs at the University of Texas. Hopwood v. Texas, 78 F.3d 932 (CA5 1996). In 2000, Florida adopted the "One Florida Initiative," terminating affirmative action by executive order. California, Texas, and Florida therefore provide excellent test  [*34]  cases to assess the results of the plaintiff's vision for a "colorblind" America. 

California, Texas, and Florida, three of the most populous states in this nation, already have the change in demographics that will soon characterize the whole nation. In California, 64.1% of people between 18 and 25 years old are minorities (black, Hispanic, Asian Pacific American, Native American, and biracial). In Texas, 56.5% of people between 18 and 25 years old are minorities. In Florida, 45.7% of people between 18 and 25 years old are minorities. n10 While the proportion of minority youth continues to increase, their educational opportunities plummet. The result of the elimination of affirmative action programs in these states has been to advance white privilege and degrade educational opportunities for blacks, Latinos, and other minorities and for women of all races. 

n10 2000 Census; SF3, Tables PCT 12, 12H-120. 

It is no accident that plaintiff utterly fails to address what happened when affirmative action was prohibited in California, Texas, and Florida. The resegregation at the UC Berkeley (Boalt Hall), UCLA, and University of Texas law schools since Proposition 209 and Hopwood took effect in 1997 is astounding. Black students comprise a mere two percent of enrollments at these three schools in 1997-2001, a two-thirds decline compared to 1993-96. n11 UCLA only had two black law students in its 2002 graduating class of nearly 300, and Boalt, UC Davis, and the University of Washington law schools have also had post-affirmative action classes that included only one or two black students. n12 

n11 Kidder, The Struggle for Access; see also U.S. Comm'n on Civil Rights, Beyond Percentage Plans: The Challenge of Equal Opportunity in Higher Education (Draft Report Nov. 2002), available at http://www.usccr.gov. 

n12 Harris, Critical Race Studies: An Introduction, 49 UCLA L. Rev. 1215, 1225 (2002); Kidder, The Struggle for Access, at tbl.5. One of the two black UCLA students, Chrystal James, testified in Grutter about the heightened atmosphere of racial tension and isolation in the wake of Proposition 209. CAJA 8143-8168. Ms. James's experiences of increased racial stigmatization of students of color and of impoverished learning environment are sadly typical of other students at the UC law schools. Br. of UCLA School of Law Students of Color. 

 [*35]  Half of U.S. Latinos now live in California or Texas, n13 yet 1997-2001 Latino enrollments at UCLA and Boalt were half of what they were in 1993-96. n14 Native American enrollments likewise dropped to token levels. n15 Placed in historical context, the "race-neutral" alternatives advanced by plaintiff and the United States are an especially bitter pill for minority students to swallow. Proposition 209 meant that black and Latino enrollments at Boalt and UCLA sank to levels not seen since affirmative action began at those schools in the late-1960s, n16 and at the University of Texas black students were the same proportion of the 1997-2001 entering classes as they were immediately following Sweatt v. Painter a half-century ago. n17 

n13 U.S. Bureau of the Census, The Hispanic Population: Census 2000 Brief, at 3, available at http://www.census.gov/prod/2001pubs/c2kbr01-3.pdf. 

n14 Kidder, The Struggle for Access, at tbl.6-7. 

n15 Id. at 42-43. An affirmative action ban would be particularly devasting for tribal governmental bodies. Expert Report of Faith Smith, Record 262; Br. of Bay Mills Indian Community, et al.; Br. of New Mexico Hispanic Bar Association, et al.; Br. of Arizona St. U. School of Law. 

n16 Karabel, The Rise and Fall of Affirmative Action at the University of California, 25 J. Blacks Higher Educ. 109 (1999). 

n17 Kidder, The Struggle for Access, at tbl.6-7. 

Attempts by Boalt and UCLA to broaden admission criteria and experiment with class-based affirmative action confirm that there simply are no viable "race-neutral" alternatives, a finding consistent with studies of the national law school applicant pool. n18 Plaintiff's claim that "race-neutral" alternatives  [*36]  are "surely available" is particularly disingenuous given that the plaintiff's counsel and expert witness in this case question the constitutionality of the Texas Ten Percent plan, an unsuccessful attempt to compensate for the loss of affirmative action, and doubt the University of California's compliance with Proposition 209. n19 

n18 See, e.g., Guerrero, Silence at Boalt Hall: The Dismantling of Affirmative Action (2002) (tinkering with admission criteria and experimenting with socioeconomic criteria were unsuccessful at Boalt); Kay, The Challenge to Diversity in Legal Education 34 Ind. L. Rev. 55, 72-79 (2000) (describing array of efforts at Boalt and other UC law schools); Wightman, The Threat to Diversity in Legal Education: An Empirical Analysis of the Consequences of Abandoning Race as a Factor in Law School Admission Decisions, 72 N.Y.U. L. Rev. 1, 14-29 (1997); Wightman, The Consequences of Race-Blindness: Revisiting Prediction Models With Current Law School Data, 53 J. Legal Educ. (forthcoming 2003). CAJA 7897-7898, 7917. 

n19 Levey, Texas's 10 Percent Solution Isn't One, Wash Post, Nov. 12 2002, at A24; Rosman, Thoughts on Bakke and its Effect on Race-Conscious Decision-making, 2002 U. Chi. Legal F. 45, 69; Heriot, University of California Admissions Under Proposition 209: Unheralded Gains Face an Uncertain Future, 6 Nexus 163, 177 (2001). 

In Florida, a single development captures the character of the attack on affirmative action. The same year that "One Florida" was implemented, two new state law schools were established--one for black students and one for Latinos. The former, at Florida A&M University, has a total of seven faculty members. The latter, at Florida International University, has a total of 12 faculty members. n20 

n20 See http://www.oneflorida.org/myflorida/government/governorinitiatives/one_florida/education.html; http://www.famu.edu/acad/colleges/law/; and http://www.fiu.edu/law/. 

In contrast, at the University of Florida College of Law--the largely white school that will become increasingly so under the dictates of "One Florida"--112 faculty members are employed. n21 

n21 See http://www.law.ufl.edu. 

 [*37]  The initiative is misnamed. It should be called "Two Floridas," or, perhaps, "Sweatt De Facto." n22 

n22 Marin & Lee, Appearance and Reality in the Sunshine State: The Talented 20 Program in Florida," Harvard Civil Rights Project. See also, Horn & Flores, Percent Plans in College Admissions: A Comparative Analysis of Three States' Experience, Harvard Civil Rights Project. Both are available at http://www.civilrightsproject.harvard.edu. 

Students and youth, outraged by the growing segregation and inequality in California, have built a new civil rights movement to defend affirmative action and integration. In May 2001, the strength of this new civil rights movement reverberated throughout the State of California when the movement forced the UC Regents to vote unanimously to reverse their ban on affirmative action. n23 

n23 See UC Regents' symbolic step to spur change in admissions, San Jose Mercury News, May 16, 2001, at 1. 

The bans on affirmative action in California and Texas have led to greater polarization along racial lines. State university admissions systems that give special preferences "to the children of alumni, to the affluent who may bestow their largess on the institutions and to those having connections with celebrities, the famous, and the powerful," while denying opportunities to the majority of young people who reside in theses states, breed understandable anger and resentment. n24 For many already, despair replaces hope. Realization of the plaintiff's vision will inevitably lead to social explosion. Bakke, 438 U.S. at 404 (Blackmun, J.). 

n24 See Golden, At Many Colleges the Rich Kids Get Affirmative Action, Wall Street Journal, Feb. 20, 2003, at A1. 

As four concurring Sixth Circuit judges found, law schools and universities across the nation should not be forced to return to the chilling prospects of such de facto segregation and its social consequences. PA 79a (Clay, J. concurring). 

 [*38]  III. THE JUDGMENT BELOW SHOULD BE CONFIRMED ON THE BASIS OF THE DEMONSTRATED BIAS IN ADMISSIONS CRITERIA 

A. The bias in admissions criteria renders plaintiff's proofs null 

Plaintiff has failed to prove her case. She showed that there are average differences by race in test scores and grades of accepted Law School applicants, and her statistician manipulated those differences in various ways. Her claim begins and ends with the grids showing gaps by race in the two credentials. But in order for proof of the test score and GPA differences to constitute proof of reverse discrimination, the law would have to sanction the baseless and stigmatizing view that the credentials are "race-neutral"--that is, that black and other minority students are less qualified, capable, and promising than white ones. The plaintiff's expert took that interpretation for granted; the Court must not do the same. 

In fact, as was proved by an overwhelming margin at trial, the problem lies not with minority students but with the measures embraced by plaintiff, which are biased in favor of whites and against minorities. The two main admissions criteria do not function as "race-neutral" measures of achievement or capacity but rather capture and reflect racial discrimination, bias, and unfairness. That is why average test scores and grades vary by race in both the national law school applicant pool and Michigan's pool. The basic data that the plaintiff presented, consisting of grids showing distributions of applicants by race, LSAT score, and GPA, graphically represent both the bias in the criteria and the necessity of maintaining affirmative action policies. The plaintiff's proofs are the students' proofs. 

The casual observer viewing the grids would immediately discern that the grids are an index of the role played by race in determining scores and grades. Underrepresented minority  [*39]  students on the whole have somewhat lower LSAT scores and even more modestly lower grades and are accordingly clustered in lower grid cells. There are three possible explanations for this. Anyone believing that scores and grades are objective measures of academic performance would conclude that the patterns of distribution show how far this nation still needs to travel to eliminate the educational inequality faced by black, Latino, and Native American students. A second explanation for the racial disparities is bias and discrimination captured in LSAT scores and grades themselves. A third possible view, one disavowed by all parties, would accept the racist lie of black, Latino, and Native American inferiority. n25 

n25 When the students offered the testimony of Stanford University geneticist Marcus Feldman to ensure that the racist explanation, which remains widespread in American culture, would be scientifically refuted in the record, plaintiff's counsel insisted they agreed with the students and the district court ruled out Professor Feldman's testimony at trial on that basis. His expert report is included in the record as part of the summary judgment proceedings. Tr. 11, 10-12; Record 253. 

At a minimum, an intellectually honest inquiry would have to eliminate the obvious possibility of bias in the data that serves as the cornerstone of plaintiff's case. 

To enter into statistical analysis of a phenomenon with the data very conspicuously skewed along precisely the axis that one is investigating--the role of race--and never to ask the question "why is this data skewed?" tramples scientific integrity in polemical mud. Results reached with this method are a meaningless waste of time. 

Kinley Larntz and plaintiff go a step further: they attempt to use these statistical sophistries to deceive the Court and the public and to secure a segregationist policy shift. Contaminated data and assumptions will not function as a fig leaf for the ugly project of resegregating legal education. n26 

n26 Even granting Professor Larntz his lazy, false assumptions about the meaning of the basic data, his methods were those of charlatanry. For example, Professor Larntz systematically discarded evidence of non-discrimination in his work for the plaintiff. He eliminated from consideration large numbers of applicants of different races with similar grades and scores who were alike rejected. Similarly, when he engaged in cell-by-cell odds ratio analysis of applicants clustered by grades and test scores, he defined statistical significance in a manner that discounts the evidence of non-discrimination in most of the cells--putting in bold type those results which he held out as showing discrimination and dismissing the importance of results where there was no showing of differential treatment even on his terms. In point of fact, by his own standards, the 24 pages of missing odds ratios or non-bold cases (the overwhelming majority) are precisely those cases where the hypothesis of non-discrimination by the Law School could not be rejected! CAJA 5306-5350, 7388. 

Even researchers who have used odds ratios in their analyses have acknowledged that "the concept of odds ratios is difficult to understand and that odds ratios have the potential to mislead readers who are unfamiliar with statistical methods." Schulman, et al., Reply to Comments on "The effect of race and sex on physicians' recommendations for cardiac catheterization," New England J. Med., Vol. 341: 285-287, No. 4, July 22, 1999. For this reason researchers who have documented their frequent misuse have argued that "it is best to avoid quantitative statements about odds ratios." Holcomb, et al., An Odd Measure of Risk: Use and Misuse of the Odds Ratio, Obstetrics and Gynecology, Vol. 1998, No. 4 (2000) (emphasis added). 

 [*40]  Social scientists must be faithful to the truth. Doing extensive calculations on the basis of data that clearly shows skewing in regard to the precise variable which one is investigating--and making no attempt to explain or compensate for that skewing--shows a shocking lack of integrity. Where scientists fail, the Court must not. This case which threatens the educational opportunity of millions of minority students must not be based on charlatan statistics based on ideology, not science. 

B. The Law School's affirmative action policy is necessary to offset bias in numerical admissions criteria 

Without affirmative action, admissions at Michigan and every other law school would consist of a rigid double standard  [*41]  giving white applicants unearned privileges and advantages and artificially diminishing the achievements and capacities of black, Latino, and Native American applicants. Taking account of race is the only way to offset this double standard and to move toward admissions policies that are fair to applicants of all races. It is also the only way for a law school to make intelligent and reasoned bets about which applicants it will be happiest to have as students and as alumni. Racial bias and discrimination would systematically distort admissions decisionmaking under the superficially "colorblind" approach proposed by the plaintiff. 

The question of bias in higher education admissions credentials has arisen in both higher education affirmative action cases that have previously reached the Court. n27 In Bakke and DeFunis, the importance of such bias for the constitutionality of affirmative action programs arose without prompting by the parties. Justice Powell observed that a showing of bias in entry credentials could be a basis for upholding race-conscious admissions, but that the University of California had not made any such showing. Bakke, 438 U.S. at 306 n43. In DeFunis, Justice Douglas, dissenting from the Court's holding that the case was moot, sharply criticized the affirmative action program at the University of Washington but ultimately concluded that because the program partly offset the LSAT's bias against minorities, the rights of the white plaintiff had not been violated. DeFunis, 416 U.S. at 344. 

n27 As discussed supra at 27, plaintiff would have the Court bar all race-conscious action not required by law. In a common-law system of judicial review, of course, new arguments for affirmative action must be considered as they arise. See, e.g., Wygant v. Jackson Board of Education, 476 U.S. 267 at 286 (1986) (O'Connor, J., concurring in part and concurring in judgment); see also Wittmer v. Peters, 87 F.3d 916, 919 (CA7 1996), cert den 519 U.S. 1111 (1997) (correctional needs justify affirmative action in promotions at boot camp); Hunter v. Regents, 190 F.3d 1061 (CA9 1999), cert den 531 U.S. 877 (research needs justify use of race in admissions to a laboratory school). 

 [*42]  While the question has previously arisen, this is the first time that it has been developed and argued. The students were granted intervention because "the disparate impact of some current admissions criteria . . . may be important and relevant factors in determining the legality of a race-conscious admissions policy." Grutter v. Bollinger, 188 F.3d 394, 401 (CA6 1999). Four of the judges in the Sixth Circuit's majority agreed with the students that the LSAT is not a "race-neutral" criterion and that its established bias supported the Law School's affirmative action policy. PA 78a-79a (Clay, J. concurring). 

This case presents an opportunity for the Court to address an issue that has been at the center of the legal and public debate n28 about affirmative action but never before developed in a record before the Court. 

n28 See, e.g., Mangan, White Students Do Better on LSAT Than Minority Classmates With Similar GPA's, Report Says, Chron. Higher Educ., Aug. 31, 2001; Selingo & Brainard, Call to Eliminate SAT Requirement May Reshape Debate on Affirmative Action, Chron. Higher Educ., Mar. 2, 2001, at A21; Schemo, Head of U. of California Seeks to End SAT Use in Admissions, N.Y. Times, Feb. 17, 2001; Cloud, Should SATs Matter?, Time, Mar. 4, 2001 at 41. 

1. The LSAT 

The uncontested evidence at trial proved that on national average the LSAT gives white students an unearned advantage of 9.2 points over their black counterparts at the same college with the same GPA. The unearned advantage of white test-takers relative to Latinos and Native Americans is smaller but still highly significant in competitive law school admissions systems. The LSAT has a biased impact by class as well, with wealthier students of a given race scoring higher than poorer ones. But the factor of race dwarfs that of socioeconomic status: the son of black surgeons scores approximately six points lower than the son of white municipal employees. CAJA 8550-8558, JA 223-225. 

 [*43]  Absent affirmative action, the LSAT would function like the poll tax and grandfather clause systems developed after Reconstruction did. The plaintiff would call it "colorblind"--and it would disqualify the overwhelming majority of black applicants despite their ability to excel in law school and in the legal profession. Graphs depicting the different distributions of LSAT scores by race make it clear why overall national black enrollment at law schools would plummet by an initial and immediate 75 percent if the plaintiff prevailed. The impact would be even more disastrous at elite schools. CAJA 8722-8724, JA 218-219. 

The district court conceded the disparate impact of the test and its weak correlation with law school grades. It further credited expert testimony offered by the students intervenors on two sources of the gap, the test's "academic English" load and the far greater access of white students, for reasons of cost and information, to test prep classes that substantially boost scores by an average of seven points. PA 275a-276a, 283a-284a. 

Two additional sources of bias on the LSAT are clearly established in the record. The expert report and deposition testimony of Stanford University Professor Claude Steele proves that stereotype threat--the racist stigma of intellectual inferiority with which black and other minority students constantly must contend--demonstrably, substantially, and artificially depresses minority students' performance on tests thought to measure intellectual ability. Stereotype threat also exerts a broader, equally pernicious downward pressure on the general academic performance of minority students. n29 CAJA 2500-2513, 7043-7044, 7068. 

n29 In the seven years since Professor Steele first identified it, stereotype threat has become a well-documented phenemonon verified by the studies of many social psychologists. It is "now widely accepted within the field of psychology." Cunningham, et al., Passing Strict Scrutiny: Using Social Science to Design Affirmative Action Programs, 90 Geo. L.J. 835, 839 (2002). See also Br. of American Sociological Association at 16-18; Gonzales, et al., The Effects of Stereotype Threat and Double-Minority Status on the Test Performance of Latino Women, 28 Personality & Soc. Psychol. Bull. 659 (2002); Rivadeneyra, The Influence of Television on Stereotype Threat among Adolescents of Mexican Descent, 62 Sci. & Eng'g, 4820 (2002); Osborne, Testing Stereotype Threat: Does Anxiety Explain Race and Sex Differences in Achievement? 26 Contemp. Educ. Psychol. 291 (2001); Blascovich, et al., African Americans and High Blood Pressure: The Role of Stereotype Threat, 12 Psychol. Sci. 225 (2001); Steele, Thin Ice: "Stereotype Threat" and Black College Students, Atlantic Monthly, Aug. 1999, at 44; Spencer, et al., Stereotype Threat and Women's Math Performance,. 35 J. Experimental Soc. Psychol. 4 (1999); Aronson, et al., When White Men Can't Do Math: Necessary and Sufficient Factors in Stereotype Threat, 35 J. Experimental Soc. Psychol. 29 (1999); Steele, A Threat in the Air: How Stereotypes Shape Intellectual Identity and Performance, 52 Am. Psychol. 613 (1997); Steele & Aronson, Stereotype Threat and the Intellectual Test Performance of African Americans, 69 J. Personality & Soc. Psychol. 797 (1995). 

 [*44]  Finally, the content of the LSAT, like that of other such tests, is the product of test construction procedures that continually reproduce the internal bias the test has had since it was developed decades ago. The test content is arbitrary, not having been honed in relation to any external criterion such as prediction of success as a law student or lawyer, and it bears a pervasive mark of cultural and racial bias. Obviously biased question items have generally been eliminated--but because new items are statistically normed in relation to prior results, the replacements chosen are those which produce the same statistical outcomes in the pre-testing process. Thus questions on which black students outscore white students during trial runs are rejected for use in scored sections of the test, whereas those that statistically match up with the generally better performance of white test-takers are chosen for use in scored sections. The generally better performance of white students is itself partly a product of these very question selection procedures.  [*45]  The process is circular, self-referential, and racialized. n30 CAJA 2500-2513, 3194-3199, 8058-8074, 8093-8102. 

n30 A substantial body of academic literature criticizes standardized tests such as the LSAT and SAT as unfair to minority students. Recent examples include Kidder & Rosner, How the SAT Creates "Built-in Headwinds": An Educational and Legal Analysis of Disparate Impact, 43 Santa Clara L. Rev. 131 (2002); Glen, When and Where We Enter: Rethinking Admission to the Legal Profession, 102 Colum. L. Rev. 1696 (2002); Madaus & Clarke, The Adverse Impact of High-Stakes Testing on Minority Students: Evidence from One Hundred Years of Test Data, in Raising Standards or Raising Barriers? Inequality and High-Stakes Testing in Public Education 85 (Orfield & Kornhaber, eds., 2001); Kidder, Does the LSAT Mirror or Magnify Racial and Ethnic Differences in Educational Attainment? A Study of Equally Achieving "Elite" College Students, 89 Cal. L. Rev. 1055 (2001); Dickens & Kane, Racial Test Score Differences as Evidence of Reverse Discrimination: Less than Meets the Eye, 38 Indus. Rel. 331 (1999); Jencks, Racial Bias in Testing, in The Black-White Test Score Gap 55, 77 (Jencks & Phillips, eds., 1998). 

2. Undergraduate grades 

Several factors combine to make the second major admissions credential, undergraduate grades, biased against minority students as well, although they are less so than LSAT scores. 

As noted above, stereotype threat artificially depresses general academic performance in addition to scores on high-stakes tests. 

In addition, most black, Latino, and Native American college students have attended segregated, inadequate primary and secondary schools or been subjected to racially skewed tracking procedures in largely white schools. On average, their undergraduate grades will be lower than those of white students who have not faced the same sharp, early pressures and constraints of institutionalized racism. These lower grades reflect differences in current levels of preparation, not differences in potential or desert. CAJA 7862-7863. 

 [*46]  Unconscious prejudice lowers the grades given to minority students by even the best-intentioned professors and graduate students. CAJA 8227-8228. 

Finally, minority students on the campuses from which Michigan's applicants come continue to face an environment made hostile by myriad quotidian slights and slurs. Most white students and faculty mean well but display varying degrees of unfamiliarity, ignorance, and prejudice. As UCLA Professor Walter Allen testified at trial, minority students face a daily run of slights and profiling, including professors who cannot distinguish among them; teaching assistants who make accusations of cheating when minority students score well on tests; white students who ask male minority students what sport they play; library employees who search minority students' book bags with discriminatory regularity; and campus police who require only predominantly minority parties to use the back doors of campus buildings. In countless ways, the message sent is that minority students do not belong on mostly white campuses--a message inextricably bound up with the racist stigma of intellectual inferiority. CAJA 8144-8146, 8229-8230, 8239-8240, 8243-8250, 8258-8263, 8269-8273. 

These incidents have a cumulative, encumbering effect. Black students report higher levels of isolation, despair, disengagement, and alienation; more often consider dropping out; and have more difficulty relating to faculty than white students of similar socioeconomic background and with similar GPAs. They face greater challenges in achieving satisfactory grades than do white students of similar economic background. CAJA 8230-8234. 

In short, grades do not have the same meaning across race. n31 

n31 The district court credited Professor Allen's conclusions--agreeing that "many underrrepresented students find the racial climate hostile at the law school's 'feeder' institutions [. . . and that . . .] such a climate can have a negative effect on these students' acdemic performance"--but then it dismissed his testimony on the inaccurate basis that Professor Allen's opinions were founded only on a focus group study that the court did not wish to credit. PA 277a-280a. In fact, Professor Allen's testimony was also based on several large-scale longitudinal studies, on a long career during which he has produced more research on black students and educational environment than any other scholar, and on the work of numerous other researchers. CAJA 8232-8235. His principle co-investigator for the study of campus climate carried out for the students here, UCLA Professor Daniel Solorzano, has also conducted substantial research on minority students and campus climate. See Allen & Jewell, African American Education Since 'An American Dilemma': An American Dilemma Revisited, 124 Daedalus 77 (1995); Allen, The Color of Success: African-American College Student Outcomes at Predominantly Black Public Colleges and Universities, 62 Harv. Educ. Rev. 26 (1992); Allen, et al., College in Black and White: African American Students in Predominantly White and in Historically Black Public Universities (1991); Hurtado, et al., Enhancing Campus Climates for Racial/Ethnic Diversity: Educational Policy and Practice, 21 Rev. Higher Educ. 279 (1998); Solorzano & Villalpando, Critical Race Theory, Marginality, and the Experience of Minority Students in Higher Education, in Emerging Issues in the Sociology of Education: Comparative Perspectives (Torres & Mitchell, eds., 1998). 

Racial isolation and alienation on college campuses are well documented elsewhere. Br. of American Educational Research Association at 24; Br. of American Sociological Association at 19-20; see also Feagin & Sikes, How Black Students Cope with Racism on White Campuses, 8 J. Blacks in Higher Educ. 91 (1995); Loo & Rolison, Alienation of Ethnic Minority Students at a Predominantly White University, 57 J. Higher Educ. 58 (1986). Moreover, the causes of hostile campus climate are also clear, including unconscious bias, stereotyping and aversive racism by white students and faculty. Br. of American Psychological Association at 4-11. 

 [*47]  3. The "general societal discrimination" decoy 

Plaintiff seeks to avoid the clear consequences of the proof below of bias in test scores and grades--i.e., her failure to prove anything and the need for affirmative action--by characterizing the students' case as resting on an argument about general societal discrimination. 

 [*48]  The students did introduce copious evidence of discrimination in society. Discrimination in society is profoundly relevant to the matter at hand; without it, there would be no need for affirmative action. In fact, if there were no discrimination in society, black, Latino, and Native American students would be present on campus in far greater numbers than have ever been achieved under modest plans like Michigan's. 

The Court's precedents do not stand for the proposition that discrimination in society is not relevant; they stand for the proposition that it is not enough. First, it has typically been asserted as a bare argument unsupported by record evidence. Bakke, 438 U.S. at 306; Wygant, 476 U.S. at 274. Relatedly, in previous cases it has not been shown to be linked to the evidentiary particulars of the matter at hand. Here, in contrast, the students proved decisively that bias and discrimination of different kinds concretely and specifically distort the two criteria that matter most in admissions and that constitute the only data plaintiff used to try to show discrimination. Finally, the students' point is not that the consideration of race remedies general societal discrimination, but rather that it takes a step toward reasoned, fair, and accurate assessment of minority candidates in the present and for the future, in light of the bias that causes their talents and achievements to be understated by LSAT scores and grades. n32 

n32 The district court erroneously held that since the precise quantum of artificial depression of LSAT scores and grades could not be determined on a student-by-student basis, the Law School was barred from considering the criteria in a race-conscious way. PA 279a-280a, 285a. This amounts to the view that the Fourteenth Amendment obligates the Law School to apply the criteria in the manner that is concededly most discriminatory. 

4. The Law School's intent 

Plaintiff also asks that the Court dismiss the students' arguments on the grounds that they are not the same as the Law School's reason for adopting affirmative action. 

 [*49]  The Law School itself has never made this objection and has never taken the position that the students' evidence of bias should be excluded from the case. In fact, when the school originally adopted affirmative action, the bias of the LSAT was repeatedly identified by faculty members as one of the reasons why it was necessary to take account of race, as was the desirability of diversity in the student body. The 1992 plan makes it clear that rigid application of the criteria would prevent the enrollment of reasonable numbers of minority students. Attorney Ted Shaw, who was in 1992 a member of the faculty and the Admissions Committee that drafted the policy, testified at deposition that standardized test scores are correlated with privilege and that without race-conscious efforts the Law School would be "racially exclusive." Two of the Law School's expert witnesses in this case--Professors Raudenbush and Steele--submitted reports indicating that rigid use of the LSAT would artifically deflate evaluations of minority applicants. CAJA 2500-2513, 3871-3875, 4856, 4866-4873, 5504; JA 116, 120. 

The Law School in all likelihood had multiple, connected, and overlapping institutional purposes; it is implausible to imagine otherwise. But no law school in its position would express all of them, given the character of the Bakke decision, the coordinated attack on affirmative action by far-right law foundations that was underway by the time the policy was adopted, and this litigation itself. Any law school would focus exclusively on diversity as a rationale. The Court should uphold the court of appeals on the bases established by the students as well as that of diversity so that the full range of interlocking reasons for the necessity of affirmative action can be freely discussed without fear of lawsuits like this one. 

Ultimately the intent of the Law School is to admit likely leaders. It is far too elite and selective to have to worry about academic proficiency; its applicant pool presents it with an embarassment of riches. It therefore looks to choose students who are likely to become "esteemed legal practitioners,  [*50]  leaders of the American bar, significant contributors to legal scholarship and/or selfless contributors to the public interest." JA 110. With respect to these predictions, test scores and grades are of no utility whatsoever--that is, their bias against minority students is maximal. As the students showed at trial through the expert testimony of Professor Rick Lempert, who also testified as a fact witness because he was the Chair of the Admissions Committee that developed the 1992 plan, Michigan's minority alumni have been just as successful in practice as their white counterparts and have in fact provided somewhat greater levels of civic service and leadership. CAJA 6195-6305. n33 

n33 Professor Lempert's study was published. Lempert, et al., Michigan Minority Graduates in Practice: The River Runs through Law School, Law & Social Inquiry Vol. 25, No. 4 (2000). Other studies have also shown that affirmative action beneficiaries succeed professionally at the same rates as their white counterparts. See, e.g., Davidson & Lewis, Affirmative Action and Other Special Consideration Admissions at the University of California, San Diego, School of Medicine, 278 Journal of the American Medical Association 1153 (1997). 

Without affirmative action, the overwhelming majority of those minority leaders would have been rejected by the Law School on the basis of an unspoken, unfair double standard rigidly and sharply favoring white applicants. CAJA 8719-8720. 

CONCLUSION 

For all the foregoing reasons, the judgment of the court of appeals should be affirmed. 


Intervenors have introduced substantial and undisputed evidence of a history of discrimination at the University of  [*15]  Michigan the effects of which are still manifest on campus today. This evidence includes, inter alia, expert analyses demonstrating the adverse impact upon minority applicants of many of the components of the "selection index" used by staff in the admissions process (if not counterbalanced by the consideration of race as one factor among others), and the longstanding pattern of discrimination and inattention toward students of color at the University. 

This showing of both past and present discrimination distinguishes this case from Bakke and satisfies the constitutional requirements that this Court has enunciated to justify a race-conscious admissions policy. It is of no legal significance that the University itself has not advanced this ground to sustain its program, because to do so would require admissions against interest that could expose the University to significant liability. In these circumstances, it suffices that the necessary showing is made by some party on the record, as was the case here. 

The history of discrimination at the University also strengthens the separate diversity justification that the University advances, and which Intervenors also support. There is a strong public policy, often given effect by this Court, of encouraging voluntary efforts on the part of both public and private actors to redress prior discriminatory conduct. 

As the trial court found, the record abounds with support for the proposition that diversity on college and university campuses brings substantial benefits to the entire community and thus rises to the level of a compelling governmental interest. It can hardly be questioned that the enrollment of a diverse student body at institutions of higher learning advances a plethora of interests important to our democratic society. Diversity furthers the purposes of equal protection under the Fourteenth Amendment by recognizing the value of racially and  [*16]  ethnically integrated environments. It is also consistent with the academic freedoms accorded to universities to determine their own selection processes, which is recognized as a special concern to the First Amendment. The University's admissions policy is thus consistent with Bakke, which should be reaffirmed, 

Plaintiffs fail to comprehend the value and purpose of diversity. They are gravely mistaken that diversity is predicated upon racial stereotypes and stigmas. The diversity rationale does not assume that students of color (or any students, for that matter) think alike, or will suffer a stigmatic injury because they are admitted through a process that takes race into account as one factor. To state that there is an African-American or Latino experience does not mean that all African Americans or Latinos think alike. Diversity in higher educational settings refutes rather than reinforces such assumptions, and is particularly important today, when most of the students admitted to the University of Michigan have attended largely segregated schools before their admission, and their college experience may be the only chance to learn and interact in a racially integrated environment. 

Finally, the University's admissions program is narrowly tailored. It furthers the interests of diversity and is sufficiently flexible that the particular qualifications of each applicant are considered. The record is clear that academic qualifications are by far the most important criteria in making admissions decisions. Race is only one of many factors considered in the process. Despite arguments to the contrary by the United States, race-neutral alternatives to the University's present admissions program do not exist, and in particular the percentage plan approach advocated by the federal government would not function in Michigan (and, early studies show, may be flawed in other parts of the country where it has been implemented). 

 [*17]  ARGUMENT 
  
I. Intervenors' Showing Of Past And Present Discriminatory Actions By The University Both Provides A Remedial Basis To Sustain Its Race-Conscious Admissions Policy And Also Strengthens The Diversity Rationale Articulated By The University For That Policy 

The court below sustained the University of Michigan's race-conscious undergraduate admissions policy on the basis of the "diversity" rationale enunciated by Justice Powell in Regents of the Univ. of Cal. v. Bakke, 438 U.S. 265 (1978). Intervenors agree with that ruling and join the University of Michigan in defending it. See infra Argument II. It bears notice, however, that in Bakke itself, the Court reached that rationale because the record before it contained no "judicial, legislative, or [appropriate] administrative findings of constitutional or statutory violations," id. at 307 (opinion of Powell, J., announcing the judgment of the Court). 

This case is different from Bakke. Intervenors did introduce substantial evidence of various discriminatory actions by the University, based upon which the court below could have made the appropriate findings that would fully justify, on remedial grounds, the University's admissions process. n19 This evidence is especially significant in light of cases decided since Bakke, which establish that race-conscious actions are constitutionally permitted not only when there are "judicial, legislative, or administrative findings of constitutional or statutory violations" but also when a public actor can show a "strong basis in evidence for its conclusion that remedial action was necessary,"  [*18]  City of Richmond v. J.A. Croson Co., 488 U.S. 469, 500 (1989). The "strong basis in evidence" standard does not require a prior adjudicative or legislative finding, or a contemporaneous judicial finding of unlawful discrimination, see Wygant v. Jackson Bd. of Educ., 476 U.S. 267, 290-93 (1986) (O'Connor, J., concurring in the judgment). A showing of a prima facie case is sufficient, see Croson, 488 U.S. at 500. 

n19 Indeed, intervention was granted explicitly because, the Sixth Circuit found, "the University is unlikely to present evidence of past discrimination by the University itself or of the disparate impact of some current admissions criteria, and . . . these may be important and relevant factors in determining the legality of a race-conscious admissions policy," Grutter v. Bollinger, 188 F.3d 394, 401 (6th Cir. 1999). 

Although the court below rejected Intervenors' contentions that a remedial justification provided an independent basis for the University's admissions policies, this Court is free to affirm an appealed decision on any ground which finds support in the record, regardless of the ground upon which the trial court relied. n20 Plaintiffs' position is that Intervenors' evidence is irrelevant because the University did not adopt it nor claim that it adopted the admissions policy for any remedial purpose. We urge the Court to reject that position. 

n20 See Whitley v. Albers, 475 U.S. 312, 326 (1986) ("respondent correctly observes that any ground properly raised below may be urged as a basis for affirmance of the Court of Appeals' decision"); United States v. New York Telephone Co., 434 U.S. 159, 166 n.8 (1977) ("prevailing party may defend a judgment on any ground which the law and the record permit"); Langnes v. Green, 282 U.S. 531, 538-39 (1931) (appellee may, without filing a cross-appeal, advance any theory in support of the judgment that is supported by the record, whether it was ignored by the court below or flatly rejected). 

It is understandable that the University has not advanced a remedial justification for its actions. To call attention to current inequities in its admissions policies, to past discrimination or the perpetuation of past discrimination on its part, or even discrimination by other governmental actors, would require the University to point the finger at itself (or its "parent"), potentially harming its reputation and placing it at risk of legal liability to others, including minority students. Cf. Wygant, 476 U.S. at 291 (O'Connor, J., concurring in the judgment) (noting that public employers might be "trapped between the competing  [*19]  hazards of liability to minorities if affirmative action is not taken . . . and liability to nonminorities if affirmative action is taken") (emphasis in original). Even to make a showing of a "strong basis in evidence" in these areas carries the same risks. 

Although the "strong basis in evidence" formulation announced in Wygant and Croson was intended to mitigate the disincentive for governmental agencies to assess their past actions and take steps voluntarily to redress any discrimination they identified, potential liability still strongly deters public bodies from themselves articulating remedial objectives because of the legal significance of making out a prima facie case. n21 This Court should therefore reject the conclusion below (Pet. App. 72a-76a) that a public body's reluctance to identify its own past discriminatory conduct prevents a court from recognizing a remedial justification for race-conscious action based upon a showing by another party of the public body's past discrimination. Cf. Croson, 488 U.S. at 492 (holding that a public agency may take race-conscious steps to avoid perpetuating discrimination caused by other public or private entities). 

n21 See, e.g., Reeves v. Sanderson Plumbing Prods., Inc., 530 U.S. 133, 148 (2000) ("a plaintiff's prima facie case, combined with sufficient evidence to find that the employer's asserted justification is false, may permit the trier of fact to conclude that the employer unlawfully discriminated"); id. at 143 ("once the defendant meets its burden of production . . . the trier of fact may still consider the evidence establishing the plaintiff's prima facie case 'and inferences properly drawn therefrom . . . on the issue of whether the defendant's explanation is pretextual'" (quoting Texas Dep't of Comty. Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 255 (1981)); In re Employment Discrimination Litig., 198 F.3d 1305, 1321-22 (11th Cir. 1999) ("If, after a 'prima facie' demonstration of discriminatory impact, the employer cannot demonstrate that the challenged practice is a job related business necessity, what explanation can there be for the employer's continued use of the discriminatory practice other than that some invidious purpose is probably at work?"). 

In Mississippi Univ. for Women v. Hogan, 458 U.S. 718, 729  [*20]  (1982), the Court rejected the state's claimed remedial justification for operating a nursing school restricted to women, noting that the state "had made no showing that women lacked opportunities to obtain training in the field of nursing or to attain positions of leadership in that field when the MUW School of Nursing opened its door or that women currently are deprived of such opportunities." See United States v. Virginia, 518 U.S. 515, 533-34 (1996). In neither Hogan nor Virginia, however, were there intervenors who presented evidence that would establish the factual basis for a claim of remedial justification. Where, as here, that showing is made by intervenors, it would seem to exalt form over substance to mandate that it be disregarded. 

In arguing for that result, Plaintiffs would have this Court ignore the history of discrimination at the University of Michigan, which they disparagingly label "societal discrimination" that is not actionable, Pet. Br. at 48. (But see Brief of NAACP Legal Defense & Educational Fund, Inc. and the American Civil Liberties Union as Amici Curiae, Grutter v. Bollinger, No. 02-241, at    .) Upon a closer review the Court will conclude that unlike the evidence in Bakke concerning the University of California at Davis medical school, there is, in fact, a history of past--and ongoing--discrimination at the University of Michigan that justifies, on remedial grounds, its race-conscious admissions policies. 

A. The University's Consideration Of Race Is Necessary To Counteract Other Factors In Its Admissions Process That Have An Unjustified Adverse Impact On Minority Applicants 

No party disputes that key components of the University's admissions criteria work to the systematic disadvantage of African-American, Latino, and other UMS applicants. The "S," "C," "G," and "A" factors unfairly disadvantage such applicants  [*21]  because they assign points that increase a candidate's chances of admission on the basis of characteristics that are unrelated to an applicant's individual achievement or potential--but which are disproportionately possessed by non-UMS, applicants. Because there is a "strong basis in evidence" to believe that the University's admissions process, if it did not balance out the adverse impact of these factors on UMS applicants by considering racial or ethnic background, would violate regulations promulgated pursuant to Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, 42 U.S.C.  2000d et seq., the University has a compelling interest in maintaining its current admissions process. 

1. The "S," "C," "G," and "A" factors have an unjustified disproportionate adverse impact on UMS applicants to the University 

The unrebutted record evidence, summarized supra pp. 6-9, establishes the discriminatory impact of the school, curriculum, geography and alumni SCUGA factors on UMS applicants. 

First, because UMS applicants disproportionately attend highly segregated n22 Michigan public schools that have relatively low numbers of honors and AP courses, average SAT scores and college-going rates, the use of the "S" (School) factor places them at an unfair disadvantage. Graduates of these schools who seek admission to the University necessarily are awarded few or no "S" factor points (Cir. App. 3478-79; Silver & Rudolph, at 16, Table 16). 

n22 See, e.g., Cir. App. 1951-52, 1964, 1970-76, 1981-91 (Expert Report of Thomas Sugrue, documenting systemic discrimination that has resulted in Michigan's having among the highest rates of school and residential segregation in the nation); Brief of NAACP Legal Defense & Educational Fund, Inc. and the American Civil Liberties Union as Amici Curiae, Grutter v. Bollinger (No. 02-241) at 6-13, 14-16. 

 [*22]  The "C" (Curriculum) factor, which assigns more points to applicants who have taken more AP, Honors and similar courses, has a like effect. By virtue of the fact that they overwhelmingly are assigned to schools that offer few or none of these courses (especially when compared to offerings in schools in predominantly non-UMS suburban districts), UMS applicants are disproportionately unable to benefit from this factor even if they are achieving at the highest levels at the schools they do attend (Cir. App. 3477, 3480). 

The "G" (Geography) and "A" (Alumni) factors also have a similar impact. The "G" factor awards points to applicants who reside in overwhelmingly white areas of one of the most residentially segregated states in the country (Cir. App. 3482; see also supra note 22). The "A" factor operates as a "grandfather clause" because it is tied to the University's racially exclusive past. n23 See Cir. App. 3672 (from 1995-98, admission rates for applicants entitled to "A" points were higher than rates for applicants without relatives who graduated from Michigan); id. at 3481 (UMS applicants admitted to the University are mainly first-generation college goers); id. at 1998 (Census tables showing black/white differences in college attendance and completion in Michigan, 1960-1990); id. at 3671 (between 1995 and 1998, more than 75% of white applicants had an alumnus/a relative, compared to only 4% of UMS applicants). 

n23 See Meredith v. Fair, 298 F.2d 696, 701 (5th Cir. 1962) ("We hold that the University's requirement that each candidate for admission furnish alumni certificates is a denial of equal protection of the laws, in its application to Negro candidates. It is a heavy burden on qualified Negro students, because of their race. It is no burden on qualified white students."). 

Significantly, these SCUGA factors reward educational advantage, far more than individual merit. The University itself has recognized that, with the limited exception of the "C"  [*23]  factor, the SCUGA factors are not measures of a Michigan UMS applicant's initiative or academic achievement. See J.A. 84, 94, 104 ("In reality, only the 'C' factor should be added to the GPA."); id. at 232 ("G" points awarded to insure "appropriate representation of students from Michigan" since University is "public institution supported by the citizens of Michigan"); id. at 233 ("A" points "recognize the continuing service and support provided to the University" by alumni). 

Nor is there any evidence that these individual characteristics, or the school characteristics captured by the "S" factor, determine or predict any level of individual performance--including likelihood of completing the program of study--at the University. n24 Moreover, any potential educational justification for use of the "S" or "C" factor alone could not conceivably extend to the triple disadvantage suffered by UMS applicants. Because these students find themselves assigned to mostly segregated schools with disproportionately few AP or Honors courses, their standardized test scores are likely on average to be lower (resulting in fewer points in the selection index), and they will not receive similar "S" or "C" point awards as students in predominantly white Michigan schools that offer more of these courses. As one of Intervenors' expert witnesses noted, UMS applicants are subject to these obstacles to admission even when they have "fully engaged the educational offerings made available to them and performed at a level of excellence" (Cir. App. 3478). 

n24 While the University determines a school's quality for "S" factor purposes in part by computing the average SAT score of test-takers at an applicant's high school there is reason to question whether this is an appropriate use of the SAT. See Expert Report of Claude Steele, Cir. App. 1928-30 (discussing limitation of use of SATs). 

2. The University has a compelling remedial interest in counteracting the individually and combined discriminatory effect of its SCUGA factors 

 [*24]  The highly disparate impact of the "S," "C," "G," and "A," factors, as well as of the SCUGA factors in combination (see Silver & Rudolph, at 19-20), justify race-conscious remedial action by the University because there is a "strong basis in evidence" for anticipating that the use of such criteria alone would constitute a violation of regulations promulgated to enforce Title VI. Those regulations prohibit entities receiving federal funds (such as the University) from using standards or criteria that have a racially discriminatory effect. See 34 C.F.R.  100.3(b)(2) (2002). n25 An institution violates these regulations by maintaining a practice that has a statistically significant disparate impact on a particular racial or ethnic group that cannot be shown to be educationally necessary. See, e.g., Watson v. Fort Worth Bank & Trust, 487 U.S. 977, 994 (1988); Board of Educ. v. Harris, 444 U.S. 130, 151 (1979). 

n25 That regulation provides: "A recipient . . . may not, directly or through contractual or other arrangements, utilize criteria or methods of administration which have the effect of subjecting individuals to discrimination because of their race, color, or national origin, or have the effect of defeating or substantially impairing accomplishment of the objectives of the program as respect individuals of a particular race, color, or national origin." 34 C.F.R.  100.3(b)(2) (emphasis added). The Court has held that while Title VI prohibits only intentional discrimination, these regulations prohibit actions that have an unjustified adverse impact. See Alexander v. Choate, 469 U.S. 287, 293 (1985) (discussing Guardians Ass'n v. Civil Serv. Comm'n, 463 U.S. 582 (1983)). 

The evidence previously summarized, which was uncontroverted, demonstrates beyond peradventure that: first, in the absence of the inclusion of race as a consideration within the "U" component, the "SCUGA factors" singly and in combination would result non-UMS applicants receiving highly disproportionate numbers of selection index points compared to UMS applicants--and second, that neither plaintiffs nor the University has articulated a credible or legally sufficient educational justification for such an admissions system (which is, in fact, the system Plaintiffs wish to impose  [*25]  upon the University through this litigation). n26 

n26 An acceptable justification must be necessary to the educational program, not just related to it in some way. See Guidelines for Eliminating Discrimination and Denial of Services on the Basis of Race, Color, National Origin, Sex, and Handicap in Vocational Education Programs, Appendix B to Part 100, 34 C.F.R.,  IV.K. (admissions criteria with impact of excluding individuals protected against discrimination by statute must be "validated as essential to participation in a given program . . . . Examples of admissions criteria that must meet this test are past academic performance . . . high school diplomas and standardized tests . . . .") (emphasis added). 

Michigan's interest in avoiding non-compliance with its Title VI obligations, as it has been able to do by considering race along with other factors in the SCUGA calculations, is surely compelling. Nothing in this Court's jurisprudence suggests that the University must choose between foregoing the use of economically or politically advantageous criteria (such as the "G" and "A" factors) and admitting applicants by lottery, on the one hand, or operating a largely segregated educational program that replicates the high levels of segregation and isolation that characterize public education in grades K-12 throughout the State, on the other. Cf. Stuart v. Roache, 951 F.2d 446, 452-56 (1st Cir. 1991) (approving consent decree authorizing race-conscious relief to offset disparate impact produced by earlier use of examinations whose validity was challenged in lawsuit). 

B. The University's Historic Discrimination Continues To Affect UMS Enrollment And To Perpetuate A Hostile Racial Climate On Campus 

As noted supra pp. 11-14, the long-continued pattern of discrimination and indifference toward UMS students and applicants by the University caused minority enrollment to decline and deterred qualified minority high school students from applying. Cf. Teamsters v. United States, 431 U.S. 324, 365-66 (1977) (recognizing that company's reputation for  [*26]  discrimination may deter minority class members from applying for jobs). Substantial evidence in the record documents this phenomenon. For instance, in 1966 the Defense Department conducted an investigation into the University's compliance with Title VI of the 1964 Civil Rights Act. The Department's report reflected Michigan's reputation as a university "basically for rich white students" and noted that "the minimal number of negroes (sic) on the University faculty is a detriment to the public image of the University" (Cir. App. 2270-71). n27 Similarly, the University's long and consistent refusal and failure, until implementation of the Michigan Mandate, to take any serious actions to condemn and reduce racially hostile acts by its own staff and by student peers entrenched perceptions and the climate of antagonism against UMS students on the campus, because that refusal and failure conveyed University officials' implicit endorsement of that climate. n28 

n27 See also, e.g., Cir. App. 2332-33 (citing 1989 affidavit of Interim University President Robben Fleming stating that extensive racial harassment on campus had led to dramatic declines in minority enrollment), 2346-67 (citing various internal University reports and studies) 2328-29 (Expert Report of Dr. Anderson), 2389-91 (Expert Report of Dr. Feagin), 3769-72 (Stephens deposition), 3382 (Test Score Senders Study). 

n28 This Court has held educational authorities or employers responsible for racial or gender harassment by supervisors or peers when they fail to respond to complaints by the victims of these actions. See Gebser v. Lago Vista Ind. Sch. Dist., 524 U.S. 274, 290 (1998) (school district is not liable for sexual harassment of student by principal unless official with authority to take corrective action received actual notice of harassment but failed, with deliberate indifference, to do so); Faragher v. City of Boca Raton, 524 U.S. 775, 806-08 (1998) (employer's damage liability for supervisor's sexual harassment of employee, in absence of tangible adverse employment action against employee, is subject to affirmative defense that employer took reasonable precautions to prevent harassment and employee unreasonably failed to use that mechanism to avoid harm); Davis v. Monroe County Bd. of Educ., 526 U.S. 629, 646-47 (1999) (adopting "deliberate indifference" standard of Gebser as basis for school district liability for peer sexual harassment of student that occurs in school during school hours when perpetrator is subject to district's disciplinary control); Monteiro v. Temple Union High Sch. Dist., 158 F.3d 1022, 1033-34 (9th Cir. 1998) (reversing dismissal of claim that school district violated Title VI when it failed to respond to student's complaint of peer racial harassment); see also Racial Incidents and Harassment Against Students at Educational Institutions; Investigative Guidance, 59 Fed. Reg. 11448 (Mar. 10, 1994) (outlining liability of educational institutions for maintaining hostile educational environment). Cf. Columbus Bd. of Educ. v. Penick, 443 U.S. 449, 457 (1979) ("Each instance of a failure or refusal to fulfill the affirmat9ve duty [to dismantle the former dual system] continues the violation of the Fourteenth Amendment"). 

 [*27]  The University's interest in eliminating these continuing effects of its own past policies and conduct, as it has sought to do in part through its admissions policy, see infra p. 45, is compelling. To the extent that the current campus climate can be regarded as the product of discriminatory actions and attitudes of others--such as non-UMS students--the University is entitled to maintain a properly tailored race-conscious admissions system in order to avoid reinforcing or perpetuating that discrimination, even discrimination by private parties. Croson, 488 U.S. at 491-92. 

C. The History Of The University's Past And Present Conduct With Discriminatory Impact Should Inform The Court's Consideration Of The Diversity Rationale For Its Current Admissions Procedures 

We have argued above that but for the University's explicit consideration of race as one factor among others, the educationally unnecessary disparate adverse impact of the remainder of its admissions procedures and the depressingly persistent discriminatory acts of University officials, resulting from deliberate decision, willful indifference, or mere apathy, justify Michigan's current race-conscious admissions system under the standards of this Court's rulings in Wygant and Croson. These matters are equally relevant to the Court's consideration of the alternative diversity rationale urged by the  [*28]  University, accepted by the court below, and approved in this Court's ruling in Bakke (to which we turn in the next section). 

At least in this case, the constitutionality of the diversity rationale cannot be adjudicated in the abstract, as if the conditions of underrepresentation, isolation and hostility toward minority students that have plagued the University to this day had no relationship to traceable, official conduct. That is the essence of Justice Powell's rejection of "societal discrimination" as an adequate underpinning for the University of California's two-track admissions scheme involved in Bakke. n29 As Justice Powell's opinion itself recognized, however, the "societal discrimination" rationale was proffered by California entirely distinct from and disconnected from, any recognition of its own discriminatory conduct, which it never even purported to acknowledge. 438 U.S. at 309-10. Justice Powell's analysis of the diversity rationale proffered by California was also made without any reference to prior discrimination, id. at 311-20. 

n29 There are persuasive bases to disagree with Justice Powell's assessment, as the dissenters in Bakke did, 438 U.S. at 324, 328-55, 362-73 (opinion of Brennan, White, Marshall & Blackmun, JJ.). See Brief of NAACP Legal Defense & Educational Fund, Inc. as Amici Curiae, Grutter v. Bollinger (No. 02-241). Our point here, however, is that the Court need not resolve that debate in this litigation, because the record evidence demonstrates that the University's prior discriminatory conduct contributes significantly to the current lack of diversity that would prevail in the absence of its race-conscious admissions process. Ignoring that record in assessing the depth and adequacy of the University's interest in achieving diversity today would do more than just blink reality; it would transform constitutional adjudication into a sterile, ahistorical exercise to a degree without any precedent in this Court's jurisprudence. 

Today, Plaintiffs and their amici have directly attacked the Bakke ruling and seek to have this Court overturn it. In considering their arguments, it is critical to realize that nothing in Justice Powell's opinion can be read to indicate that the  [*29]  Court would not have taken account of a record of past discrimination by California that contributed to the isolation and lack of diversity that the Medical School was seeking to alter in deciding that case, if there had been such a record. 

We believe that the presence of such evidence would have been considered and relied upon by the Bakke Court in upholding the diversity arguments. Whether that is right or wrong, the issue is an open one for this Court. The strong tradition of encouraging voluntary efforts to redress past discriminatory conduct, on the part of both private actors n30 and public entities, n31 should not be abandoned in this case. In weighing the diversity rationale, the Court should take account of the strong impetus and justification that Michigan's historical and current discriminatory conduct provides for its efforts to achieve diversity. 

n30 See, e.g., United Steelworkers of America v. Weber, 443 U.S. 193 (1979). 

n31 See Croson, 488 U.S. at 492 (opinion of O'Connor, J., Rehnquist, C.J. and White, J.), 519 (opinion of Kennedy, J.), 528 (opinion of Marshall, Brennan & Blackmun, JJ.). 
  
II. Diversity Is A Compelling Governmental Interest Sufficient To Support The University Of Michigan's Race-Conscious Admissions Policy 

The University presented in the record a wealth of specific data from among the most respected researchers in the country that establishes the value of diversity. That record demonstrates beyond any doubt that a racially diverse campus provides a better education, both in and out of the classroom, than an all-white campus. The evidence further shows that the experience of attending a racially diverse collegiate institution brings measurable benefits to all segments of our society. Based upon this evidence and upon their own experience, a widely varied group of amici are submitting briefs testifying to the need to  [*30]  preserve racial diversity in higher education. 

Intervenors share the belief that achieving a diverse student body is a compelling governmental interest that fully justifies the University's race-conscious admissions policy, and we join in the arguments set out in its Brief, presenting only some additional considerations here. 

A. Bakke Compels Rejection Of Plaintiffs' Proposed Interpretation Of The Fourteenth Amendment 

1. A majority of the Court in Bakke would have sustained the University of Michigan's admissions program 

It requires no resort to the interpretive principles of Marks v. United States, 430 U.S. 188 (1977) to conclude that a majority of the Bakke Court would find the admissions program at the University of Michigan to be supported by a "compelling" governmental interest. For Justice Powell, "the attainment of a diverse student body . . . clearly is a constitutionally permissible goal for an institution of higher education," Bakke, 438 U.S. at 311-12. The four Justices who subscribed to the opinion authored by Justice Brennan "agreed with Mr. Justice Powell that a plan like the "Harvard" plan [citation omitted] is constitutional under our approach, at least so long as the use of race to achieve an integrated student body is necessitated by the lingering effects of past discrimination," Id. at 326 n.1 [emphasis added]. For the reasons given supra  I (and especially as explained in  I.C.), the condition set forth in the italicized language from Justice Brennan's opinion is unquestionably satisfied in this case. 

2. Bakke and other decisions support the conclusion that diversity is a compelling governmental interest 

Plaintiffs urge the Court to adopt a narrow reading of the  [*31]  Fourteenth Amendment that would limit consideration of race only to remedy documented instances of discrimination against identified individuals, claiming that this is the proper reading of the Court's seminal ruling in Bakke, upon which public and private institutions (educational and other) have relied for a quarter of a century. Such an approach extends far beyond Bakke and subsequent opinions and should be rejected. 

In Bakke itself, the Court vacated the California Supreme Court's injunction and reversed that portion of its judgment holding that the Davis medical school could not constitutionally consider race in any manner in its admissions process. Specifically, in a portion of his opinion, which four other Justices joined, Justice Powell held that the California Supreme Court judgment forbidding any consideration of race in state higher education admissions impermissibly "failed to recognize that the State has a substantial interest that legitimately may be served by a properly devised admissions program involving the competitive consideration of race and ethnic origin." Bakke, 438 U.S. at 320; see id. at 325-26 (opinion of Brennan, White, Marshall & Blackmun, JJ.). Thus the Court left the door open for the University of California to establish race-conscious programs in the future. See id. at 324-26. 

The Bakke Court's reversal of this portion of the judgment of the California Supreme Court has not been disturbed in subsequent opinions, which have been read by both this Court and by lower courts and educational institutions as an indication that the Constitution permits sufficient "breathing room" for a properly constructed affirmative action plan. n32 While there have  [*32]  obviously been developments in the Court's equal protection jurisprudence since Bakke, the Court has never returned to the subject of university admissions, nor has it "indicated that Justice Powell's approach has lost its vitality in that unique niche of our society," Smith v. University of Washington Law Sch., 233 F.3d 1188, 1200 (9th Cir. 2000), cert. denied, 532 U.S. 1051 (2001). 

n32 In Metro Broadcasting, Inc. v. FCC, 497 U.S. 547 (1990), for example, Justice Brennan's majority opinion cited Bakke for the proposition that "'a diverse student body' contributing to 'a robust exchange of ideas' is a 'constitutionally permissible goal' on which race-conscious university admissions programs may be predicated." Id. at 568 (quoting Bakke, 438 U.S. at 311-13). Although the Court's decision in Adarand Constructors, Inc. v. Pena, 515 U.S. 200 (1995), overruled Metro Broadcasting on the separate issue of whether a lower level of constitutional scrutiny applies to racial preferences enacted by Congress, see 515 U.S. at 227-35, Adarand did not involve (and the Court did not reject) the proposition that institutions of higher education have a compelling interest in obtaining the educational benefits of a diverse student body. See id. at 257-58 (Stevens, J., dissenting). See also Wygant, 476 U.S. at 286 (O'Connor, J., concurring) (citing Justice Powell's opinion in Bakke, "although its precise contours are uncertain, a state interest in the promotion of racial diversity has been found sufficiently 'compelling,' at least in the context of education, to support the use of racial considerations in furthering that interest"); Wessmann v. Gittens, 160 F.3d 790, 796 (1st Cir. 1998) (precedential value of Justice Powell's Bakke opinion should not be disturbed, especially where various individual justices have "from time to time . . .written approvingly of ethnic diversity in comparable settings"). 

3. Bakke should be reaffirmed 

A "terrible price would [be] paid" for overruling Bakke now. Planned Parenthood v. Casey, 505 U.S. 833, 864 (1992). The price would be paid by public and private educational institutions throughout the United States that have relied on Bakke to enable them to diversify the ranks of higher education. See, e.g., William G. Bowen & Derek Bok, The Shape of the River: Long-Term Consequences of Considering Race in College and University Admissions ("Bowen & Bok") 8, 252-53 (1998) (citing Association of American Universities' unanimous statement affirming educational value of diversity); Akhil Reed Amar & Neal Kumar Katyal, Bakke's Fate, 43 UCLA L. REV. 1745, 1769 (1996) ("An entire generation of Americans has been schooled under Bakke-style affirmative action, with the explicit blessing of--indeed, following a how-to-do-it  [*33]  manual from--U.S. Reports."); Scholars' Reply to Professor Fried, 99 YALE L.J. 163, 166 (1989) ("thousands of public educational institutions, attempting to provide a more diverse group of students and faculty, have, of their own volition, followed Justice Powell's direction . . . to consider minority status as one among many relevant factors"). 

The price would also be paid by the Court itself. We are "only a generation or so removed from the legally enforced segregation which was used to discriminatorily deny African Americans and other minorities access to education." Grutter v. Bollinger, 288 F.3d 732, 764 (6th Cir.) (Clay, J., concurring), cert. granted, 123 S. Ct. 617 (2002). The pillars of Brown and Bakke have stood tall enough to allow colleges and universities to afford educational opportunity for a generation to those who have historically been subject to discrimination. To overrule a watershed decision like Bakke and its approval of narrowly tailored race-conscious admissions policies "would subvert the Court's legitimacy beyond any serious question." Casey, 505 U.S. at 867. It is therefore imperative that the Court adhere to the essence of Bakke. 

B. Diverse Enrollments In Institutions Of Higher Education Further A Wide Variety Of Interests Important To Democratic Societies Such As Ours 

The concept of diversity reflects values that lie at the core of a democratic society, as well as fundamental American constitutional principles. n33 For this reason, governmental actions that foster or preserve diversity unquestionably serve "compelling interests." 

n33 Of course, even the United States Constitution was textually inconsistent with democratic values until modified to include the 13th, 14th and 15th Amendments. 

The very notion of representative democracy encompasses full and equal participation in the common governance of  [*34]  society by the members of a variegated polis. Thus, for instance, this Court has long recognized voting to be among the most basic rights deserving of constitutional protection. E.g., Reynolds v. Sims, 377 U.S. 533, 562 (1964) ("The right to exercise the franchise in a free and unimpaired manner is preservative of other basic civil and political rights"). The Court has also given constitutional protection to the opportunity for all citizens--and even non-citizens--to become equipped, through education, with the basic tools and skills necessary to participate in civic affairs. See, e.g., Plyler v. Doe, 457 U.S. 202, 222 (1982) and cases cited; id. at 234 (Blackmun, J., concurring) ("denial of an education . . . places [the individual] at a permanent political disadvantage"). Exclusion from public institutions, or from the opportunity to communicate and associate with other members of the polis are, therefore, deeply inconsistent with basic American constitutional values, see, e.g., Terry v. Adams, 345 U.S. 461 (1953) ("Jaybird" primary); Gomillion v. Lightfoot, 364 U.S. 339 (1960) (gerrymander excluding African Americans from eligibility to vote for Tuskegee, Alabama city government), even if they are supported by the majority of the electorate, see Lucas v. Forty-Fourth Gen'l Assembly of Colorado, 377 U.S. 713 (1964). n34 

n34 Plaintiffs suggest that the failure to offer each of them admission to the University constitutes the same sort of "exclusion" as was involved in these cases, because it occurred in the context of an admissions process in which race was one among many factors taken into consideration. While there is reason to question whether race had anything to do with plaintiffs' rejection, see infra p. 44 n.42 & accompanying text, there is a more significant distinction. The individualized determination to decline to offer admission to specific white applicants did not make the University an exclusive preserve for UMS students. To the contrary, undergraduate enrollment at the University remains heavily white. No one who visited the Michigan campus today would conclude that white applicants as a group were excluded from enrollment at the school. Plaintiffs' facile analogy trivializes the important constitutional principles upon which they seek to rely. 

 [*35]  These general principles have been given widespread application in a variety of circumstances, such as those involving the rights of candidates to communicate effectively with the members of the polis. E.g., Buckley v. Valeo, 424 U.S. 1 (1976). Most significant for the present matter, the Court long ago discerned that in a modern society, an equal or effective educational opportunity cannot be provided within a democracy to a minority in a setting that is isolated from contact with members of the majority and the future leadership of the polis. Sweatt v. Painter, 339 U.S. 629, 634 (1950):
  
The law school to which Texas is willing to admit petitioner excludes from its student body members of the racial groups which number 85% of the population of the State and include most of the lawyers, witnesses, jurors, judges and other officials with whom petitioner will inevitably be dealing when he becomes a member of the Texas Bar. With such a substantial and significant segment of society excluded, we cannot conclude that the education offered petitioner is substantially equal to that which he would receive if admitted to the University of Texas Law School.
Against this background, Plaintiffs' contention that actions to achieve diverse student enrollments in public institutions of higher education do not serve compelling governmental interests is nothing short of astonishing. 

1. Diversity furthers the purposes of the Fourteenth Amendment 

The goal of diversity is of particular importance to Intervenors, who are members of minority groups that historically have been subjected to official prejudice and subordination, because its adoption and effectuation by governmental entities today gives credibility and meaning to the very different aspirations that we today profess as a nation. Diversity is the opposite of the enforced isolation that produced  [*36]  "discrete and insular minorities," precluded from protecting their interests in the political process, whom this Court suggested in United States v. Carolene Prods. Co., 304 U.S. 144, 152 n.4 (1938), were in need of special judicial solicitude. As this Court has recognized, in a multi-racial society, diversity is integration. 

Underlying the rationale in Sweatt and McLaurin v. Oklahoma State Regents, 339 U.S. 637 (1950) is the notion that there is value in racially and ethnically integrated settings. The Court understood, in those cases, that the "intellectual commingling of students"--specifically in a racially integrated (and thus racially diverse) setting--aids the institution's students in the "pursuit of effective" education. McLaurin, 399 U.S. at 641. The Court also recognized that forbidding African-American students from attending white law schools harmed them because of the specific role that racial segregation played in limiting educational opportunity for minorities. Sweatt, 339 U.S. at 634. An integrated educational setting served to promote the mandates of equal protection by providing minority students access to the resources and prestige that accompany attendance at established, competitive schools. 

The same holds true for a diverse educational setting. By definition, an institution cannot be racially diverse if it is racially segregated. The added component of diversity, however, is that its benefits flow not only to students suffering the effects of discrimination, but to all students in the institution. See infra pp. 38-43. Because diversity furthers the constitutional value of equal protection, it is compelling. See Goodwin Liu, Affirmative Action in Higher Education: The Diversity Rationale and the Compelling Interest Test, 33 HARV. C.R.-C.L. L. REV. 381, 382, 417 (1998) (placing diversity rationale "squarely within the existing norms of equal protection doctrine" and concluding that "promoting educational diversity is fundamental to the task of maintaining  [*37]  a democratic political system"). 

2. Diversity furthers important First Amendment interests 

In Bakke, Justice Powell found that the interest in a diverse student body "clearly is a constitutionally permissible goal for an institution of higher education." Bakke, 438 U.S. at 311-12. He noted that "academic freedom, though not a specifically enumerated constitutional right, long has been viewed as a special concern of the First Amendment." Id. at 312. Recognizing that one of the "essential freedoms" of a university is to select "who may be admitted to study," Sweezy v. New Hampshire, 354 U.S. 234, 263 (1957) (Frankfurter, J., concurring in the result), Justice Powell further observed that the national commitment to safeguarding academic freedoms, is "a special concern of the First Amendment." Bakke, 438 U.S. at 312 (quoting Keyishian v. Bd. of Regents, 385 U.S. 589, 603 (1967)). These academic freedoms include the ability of the university to do two things in the context of diversity. First, the university may design a student body that best reflects the academic vigor of the institution and that would best contribute to a "robust exchange of ideas." Id. n35 Second, the university may take measures to admit the individuals of its choosing consistent with its design. Indeed, the invocation of the First  [*38]  Amendment in this way presents a "countervailing" constitutional principle to the Fourteenth Amendment. Bakke, 438 U.S. at 313. Therefore, notions of academic freedom, ensconced as they are in the First Amendment, render diversity an interest "of paramount importance," in the fulfillment of a university's educational mission, and thus sufficiently compelling to justify the competitive consideration of race to achieve that mission. Id. (emphasis added). 

n35 In numerous settings, courts have recognized the instrumental value of diversity. See, e.g., Wittmer v. Peters, 87 F.3d 916, 918 (7th Cir. 1996) (finding that a correctional boot camp's mission of pacification and reformation of its population was a compelling interest justifying the consideration of race in staff appointments); Hunter ex rel. Brandt v. Regents of the Univ. of Cal., 190 F.3d 1061, 1064 n.6 (9th Cir. 1999) (holding that the "operation of a research-oriented elementary school dedicated to improving the quality of education in urban public schools" is a sufficiently compelling interest); see also United States v. Ovalle, 136 F.3d 1092, 1107 (6th Cir. 1998) (recognizing the important, thus compelling, interest of a jury pool's reflecting the diversity of the community). 

C. Plaintiffs Profoundly Misunderstand Or Misrepresent The Value And Purposes Of Diversity Within Educational Institutions 

Plaintiffs contend that diversity depends upon and fosters racial stereotyping, and that the only diversity that could be considered compelling is "intellectual diversity." They posit a binary choice between "intellectual diversity" and "racial diversity" that is both false and a misrepresentation of the analysis set forth in Justice Powell's opinion in Bakke. 

Justice Powell concluded that it was constitutional for a university to consider "a far broader array of qualifications and characteristics of which racial or ethnic origin is but a single though important element." Id. at 315. According to Justice Powell, a student "with a particular background--whether it be ethnic, geographic, culturally advantaged, or disadvantaged--may bring . . . experiences, outlooks, and ideas that enrich the training of its student body and better equip its graduates to render with understanding their vital service to humanity." Id. at 314. This is a specific recognition that students of differing racial and ethnic background bring to a university a diversity of experiences, outlooks, and ideas, and that all of these factors (and not just one's intellectual views) are constitutive elements of academic diversity. 

Implicit in both Bakke and Sweatt is the proposition that race and ethnicity can indeed influence one's "experiences, outlooks,  [*39]  and ideas." This diversity is not compelling simply because it ensures different viewpoints on intellectual arguments in the classroom. It is instead compelling, in part, because it ensures that students are exposed to peers with different experiences that inform their education, both in the classroom and in extracurricular activities, in dorm rooms, and in other places that are a critical part of the college experience. 

To assert that people of different races have a common experiential base, or more particularly that people from racial and ethnic minorities have a different experiential base than people who are white is hardly a novel proposition. For example, both Justice Marshall and Justice Thomas have spoken movingly about the importance of race in shaping them as people, though the views each has expressed on many issues may be different. n36 Other Justices have spoken of the effect on the Court of simply having African-American Justices. n37 

n36 See e.g., Juan Williams, A Question of Fairness, ATLANTIC MONTHLY, Feb. 1987 at 70; Hearing of the Senate Judiciary Comm. on the Nomination of Clarence Thomas to the Supreme Court, 102nd Cong. 260 (1991). As noted in the amici brief filed by current law students at accredited American law schools in Grutter, "Justice Thomas' recent remarks concerning the meaning of cross-burning may not be shared by all African-Americans, [but] they were uniquely powerful because of the fact that he grew up as an African-American in the rural, segregated South." Brief of 13,000 + Current Law Students At Accredited American Law Schools As Amici Curiae In Support Of Respondents, Grutter v. Bollinger (No. 02-241) at 4 (citing transcript of oral argument in Virginia v. Black, No. 01-1107 (Dec. 11, 2002) at 21-23). 

n37 For example, Justice Scalia said, "Marshall could be a persuasive force by just sitting there. . . . He wouldn't have had to open his mouth to affect the nature of the conference and how seriously the conference would take matters of race." Juan Williams, Thurgood Marshall: American Revolutionary, 388-89 (1998); see also Sandra Day O'Connor, Thurgood Marshall: The Influence of a Raconteur, 44 STAN. L. REV. 1217 (1992); Anthony Kennedy, The Voice of Thurgood Marshall, 44 STAN. L. REV. 1221 (1992). 

 [*40]  The recent national debate over racial profiling has also illustrated the different experiential base of people from racial and ethnic minorities. There is considerable evidence that many police departments stop African-American or Latino motorists more often (all other factors being equal) than they do white motorists, that African-American or Latino shoppers are more often followed by security guards, and that Latinos are more often stopped by immigration officials. n38 

n38 See, e.g., Peter Verniero, Interim Report of the State Police Review Team Regarding Allegations of Racial Profiling, 1999 N.J. ATT'Y GEN. REP. 27 ("The overwhelming majority of searches (77.2%) involved black or Hispanic persons."); Elliot Spitzer, The New York City Police Department's "Stop and Frisk" Practices, 1999 N.Y. ATT'Y GEN. REP. 94-95 (finding that blacks comprise 25.6% of New York's population, but 50.6% of all persons stopped were black; Hispanics comprise 23.7% of New York's population, but 33% of all persons stopped were Hispanic; whites comprise 43.4% of the City's population but only 12.9% of all persons stopped); See also Grutter v. Bollinger, 288 F.3d 732, 764-65 (6th Cir. 2002) (Clay, J., concurring); United States v. Montero-Camargo, 208 F.3d 1122, 1131-32 (9th Cir.) (en banc), cert. denied sub nom. Sanchez-Guillen v. United States, 531 U.S. 889 (2000); Washington v. Lambert, 98 F.3d 1181, 1188 (9th Cir. 1996); Deseriee A. Kennedy, Consumer Discrimination: The Limitations of Federal Civil Rights Protection, 66 Mo. L. Rev. 275 (2001) (describing differential treatment experienced by numerous minority shoppers). 

Not all African Americans or Latinos will have each of these experiences. Not all will draw the same conclusions about the existence or the validity of such practices. However, every African American or Latino will have to consider this phenomenon, recognizing that there is a possibility that he or she will be subject to it. That consideration will have a different quality than the identical consideration of a white American. In short, African-American and Latino people have different experiences than their white counterparts precisely because of the powerful role that race continues to play in this country. These experiences are, in part, historical and, in part, continue  [*41]  today. n39 

n39 See Cir. App. 1946-2043 (Expert Report of Thomas Sugrue); id. at 1523-70 (Expert Report of Albert Camarillo; id. at 1571-1647 (Expert Report of Eric Foner); Georgia v. McCollum, 505 U.S. 42, 68 (1992) (O'Connor, J., dissenting) ("It is by now clear that conscious and unconscious racism can affect the way white jurors perceive minority defendants and the facts presented at their trials, perhaps determining the verdict of guilt or innocence."); id. at 69 (recognizing "a world where the outcome of a minority defendant's trial may turn on the misconceptions or biases of white jurors"); Peters v. Kiff, 407 U.S. 493, 503-04 (1972) ("We are unwilling to make the assumption that the exclusion of Negroes has relevance only for issues involving race . . . [Their] exclusion deprives the jury of a perspective on human events that may have unsuspected importance in any case that may be presented."); Grutter, 288 F.3d at 764 ("Notwithstanding the fact that the black applicant may be similarly situated financially to the affluent white candidates, this black applicant may very well bring to the student body life experiences rich in the African-American traditions emulating the struggle the black race has endured in order for the black applicant even to have the opportunities and privileges to learn.") (Clay, J., concurring). 

A prime benefit of racial diversity on college campuses is to make the point that, notwithstanding common or different experiences, not all African Americans, or Latinos, or white persons, think alike. n40 As one commentator has noted, "the diversity rationale contemplates that educational benefits flow from both interracial and intra-racial diversity." Goodwin Liu, supra, 33 HARV. C.R.-C.L. L. REV. AT 426. n41 Diversity thus  [*42]  works to reduce, not reinforce, the stereotyping that remains all too common in our nation today given the high levels of segregation and isolation in housing and pre-collegiate education. See Brief of NAACP Legal Defense & Educational Fund, Inc. and the American Civil Liberties Union as Amici Curiae, Grutter v. Bollinger (No. 02-241), at 13-17; Brief of Equal Employment Advisory Council as Amicus Curiae in Support of Neither Party, Grutter v. Bollinger (No. 02-241). 

n40 See Bowen & Bok, at 280 ("The black student with high grades from Andover may challenge the stereotypes of many classmates just as much as the black student from the South Bronx."); Sheila Foster, Difference and Equality: A Critical Assessment of the Concept of "Diversity," 1993 WIS. L. REV. 105, 140 (1993) ("although race is a proxy for a different experience in this society, it does not necessarily create an ethnic conglomerate with a monolithic viewpoint about that experience. Nor does it create one essential experience based on color."). 

n41 See also Amar & Katyal, Bakke's Fate, 43 UCLA L. Rev. at 1763 n.87 (noting that "Justice Powell's Bakke Appendix pointedly quoted Harvard's recognition of the importance of intra- as well as inter-racial diversity") (citing Bakke, 438 U.S. at 324) (appendix to the opinion of Powell, J.). 

It can hardly be disputed that "people do not learn very much when they are surrounded only by the likes of themselves." Cir. App. 1501; see also Bok & Bowen at 229 ("The four years spent at a residential college have long offered a time and a place for extensive interaction around the clock. When one considers the natural tendency on the part of students to associate with (and especially to live with) individuals like oneself, it is likely that many students encounter a wider range of people in college than they will ever see again on such an intimate, day-by-day basis."). Since most of the students admitted to the University of Michigan have not attended racially integrated primary and secondary schools, Cir. App. at 1985-89, their University experience may be the only "opportunity to disrupt an insidious cycle of lifetime segregation," Cir. App. at 1681. 

Ultimately, as the Court has observed: "Attending an ethnically diverse school may help . . . prepare minority children 'for citizenship in our pluralistic society,' while, we may hope, teaching members of the racial majority 'to live in harmony and mutual respect' with children of minority heritage." Washington v. Seattle Sch. Dist. No. 1, 458 U.S. 457, 472-73 (1982) (citations omitted). It is not too much to pose the following question: "If a far-flung democratic republic as  [*43]  diverse--and at times divided--as [early twenty-first] century America is to survive and flourish, it must cultivate some common spaces where citizens from every corner of society can come together to learn how others live, how others think, how others feel. If not in public universities, where? If not in young adulthood, when?" Amar & Katyal, Bakke's Fate, 43 UCLA L. Rev. at 1749. 
  
III. The University's Race-Conscious Admissions Process Is Narrowly Tailored 

A. The University's Plus-Factor Admissions Program Furthers Diversity, Is Flexible, And Does Not Insulate Individual Applicants From Comparison With Others 

The admissions program sustained below is narrowly tailored because it is necessary to further the asserted compelling interest; it flexibly considers race; and it does not pose an undue burden on non-beneficiaries. It thus comports with the criteria articulated by Justice Powell, who suggested that, in evaluating the scope of a race-conscious admissions program, a court should consider (1) whether the manner of considering race under the admissions program furthers the asserted diversity interest; (2) whether the program insulates individual applicants from comparison with all other applicants for the available seats; and (3) whether the program is sufficiently flexible to consider all elements of diversity in light of the particular qualifications of each applicant, and to place them on the same footing for consideration. Bakke, 438 U.S. at 315-17. See also Croson, 488 U.S. at 489, 504-10 (discussing narrow tailoring requirements for set-aside programs). The inclusion of race or ethnicity as one among the "U" factors that is taken into consideration along with the multiplicity of other factors distinguishes the Michigan approach from the two-track model that the Court struck down in Bakke. 

 [*44]  Unlike the Davis medical school's plan, no seats at Michigan are reserved for UMS students, and white applicants are competitively considered for all places in an entering class. One expert witness estimated through regression equations that if race were eliminated entirely from the University's admissions process, UMS enrollments would plummet but the statistical probability of admission of any non-UMS applicant would rise by only 0.02 per cent (from 0.61 to 0.63) (Cir. App. 1901). Race is a "very distant third" in determining a candidate's chances for undergraduate admission (Silver & Rudolph, at 7; see also Cir. App. 1871). Equally striking, Intervenors' experts closely analyzed admissions in 1995 and 1997 and concluded that the failure to offer admission to the individual Plaintiffs in this case did not result from the consideration given race in the process (Silver & Rudolph, at 10, 13). n42 Thus, the record makes clear that race is not accorded so much weight that it precludes competitive consideration of all applicants. 

n42 The analysis indicated that Jennifer Gratz received only a 0.1 initial adjustment in her GPA, no "S" factor points and no "A" points (Silver & Rudolph, at 11-12). In contrast, in 1995 there were 2,661 applicants who had unadjusted GPAs that were lower than Gratz's but that, when adjusted in accordance with the University's consistent procedure, outranked her adjusted GPA. All of these applicants received offers of admission; and 60% of them were non-UMS students (id. at 9-12). The experts concluded that it was "more probable that Gratz was displaced by a non-UMS applicant than by a UMS applicant" (id. at 10). 

Patrick Hamacher, by contrast, had his GPA initially adjusted upward by 0.2 and also received "S" points based on the high school he attended and "A" points because his mother attended Michigan. However, even as adjusted Hamacher's GPA was only 3.0, leading the experts to find that he had less than a fifty-fifty chance of being admitted and that "race was not a factor in the recalculation of his GPA, nor in his non-admission" (id. at 13). 

Not only is the process tailored to balance the negative impact on UMS candidates' chances of admission that result  [*45]  from factors not justified by educational necessity, and which are substantially determined by pervasive past and continuing discrimination, n43 but it is also directly related to and designed to dispel the lingering perception--that was created by the long history of discrimination and indifference that is documented on the record of this litigation--that the University is not open to minority applicants. By facilitating admission of a group of minority students sufficient to enable them to form community and social support networks, race-conscious admissions reduce the racial tensions on campus that are at the core of the University's negative reputation (see Cir. App. 2466); UMS students participating in focus groups conducted by Intervenors' expert witness identified increased numbers of students of color at the school as a crucial step in changing the racial climate (Cir. App. 2424-28). 

n43 See Brief of NAACP Legal Defense & Educational Fund, Inc. and American Civil Liberties Union as Amici Curiae, Grutter v. Bollinger (No. 02-241); Brief of NAACP Legal Defense & Educational Fund, Inc. as Amicus Curiae, Adarand Constructors, Inc. v. Mineta, 534 U.S. 103 (2001) (No. 00-730). 

Finally, it bears repetition that all of the candidates admitted to the University as a result of the race-conscious process in effect from 1995 to 2000 (the years for which evidence is available in this record) were qualified for admission and likely to succeed as students at the school. See supra note 3 and accompanying text. n44 

n44 Despite the fact that all of the students on campus have been qualified and likely to succeed, Plaintiffs and others contend that students of color are stigmatized by a race-conscious admissions process. This is both a vicious and illogical argument. Any stigma attached to students of color at predominantly white institutions did not originate with race-conscious admissions programs, nor is it likely that it would end with their demise. Rather, the best way to destroy persistent myths of the inferiority of students of color is to create racially integrated environments where qualified individuals of all backgrounds have the opportunity to interact and make informed judgments about one another. 

Those opposed to race-consciousness in admissions do not explain why applicants who are admitted because they are the children of alumni, or are athletes, or are admitted based on geographical preference, or even socio-economic disadvantage, suffer no similar stigma--or at least are given the chance to overcome doubts by demonstrating their qualifications. See, e.g., Sheila Foster, supra, 1993 WIS. L. REV. at 146 

Ultimately, the fact that an admittedly qualified African American or Latino student, whose test score is lower than those of a rejected white applicant, is stigmatized, while a comparably qualified white student is not, says far more about the persistence of race and ethnicity as stigma than it does about problems inherent in a race-conscious admissions program. 

 [*46]  B. Percentage Plans Are An Inadequate Alternative 

The United States, in its amicus brief, suggests that the University's admissions policies are not narrowly tailored because there are equally effective race-neutral alternatives. Specifically, the United States urges consideration of more aggressive recruitment combined with a percentage plan approach like those employed for the public universities in a number of states, including Florida, Texas, and California. All three States prohibit the use of race as a factor in school admissions. 

As a threshold matter, the district court found, based on unrebutted testimony, that Michigan is already doing all it can to recruit under-represented minorities. Pet. App. 42a ("University has attempted to enlarge its pool of under-represented minority applicants through vigorous minority recruitment programs, which have all proved to be unavailing"). 

Percentage plans present a myriad of problems. See generally U.S. Commission on Civil Rights, Beyond Percentage Plans: The Challenge of Equal Opportunity in Higher Education (Nov. 2002), available at http://www.usccr.gov/ (hereinafter "USCCR Report"). Early studies indicate that they are not, in fact, equally effective as the approach approved in Bakke in achieving diverse enrollments  [*47]  at the undergraduate level. n45 Moreover, it is sophistry to  [*48]  refer to such plans as "race neutral." Their effectiveness in producing diverse enrollments depends directly upon the existence of a feeder pool of racially segregated schools from which applicants are drawn. n46 Indeed, those who have challenged Michigan's policies here have already indicated that they plan to challenge programs utilizing the percentage plan approach as improperly race-conscious. n47 

n45 For a comparative analysis of all three states' experiences, see Catherine L. Horn & Stella M. Flores, Percent Plans in College Admissions: A Comparative Analysis of Three States' Experiences, The Civil Rights Project, Harvard University (February 2003), available at http://www.civilrightsproject.harvard.edu/research/affirmativeaction/tristate.php (concluding that it is incorrect to attribute any significant increase in campus diversity to a percent plan alone, and noting that a variety of race-conscious outreach, recruitment, financial aid and support programs appear to be central to the ability of some campuses to recover even partially from loss of minority students that occurred after abolition of race-conscious admissions programs). Findings of researchers as to each state may be summarized as follows: 

Florida: A recent study has concluded that Florida's plan, which guarantees admission to one of its colleges to students who graduate in the top 20% of their high school class, assuming a basic curriculum, is neither race-neutral nor an effective alternative to a race-conscious admissions program. Patricia Marin & Edgar K. Lee, Appearance and Reality in the Sunshine State: The Talented 20 Program in Florida, The Civil Rights Project, Harvard University (February 2003), available at http://www.civilrightsproject.harvard.edu/research/affirmativeaction/florida.php (major findings include: (1) plan has led to admission of very few students to state university system who would not have been admitted under pre-existing, non-race-conscious rules; (2) plan provided no guarantee of admission to two most highly selective campuses in the system; (3) only an insignificant number of "newly eligible" minority students achieved access to the system; (4) plan includes far more White and Asian students than Blacks and Hispanics, the two groups most underrepresented at the most selective campuses; and (5) the minimal success of the plan relies on race-attentive recruitment, retention, and financial aid policies). 

Texas: Since 1998, Texas has provided that the top 10% of students in each high school are guaranteed admission to the undergraduate program of their choice. In 1994, African Americans constituted 5.3% of the minority enrollment at the University of Texas-Austin. That amount dropped to 2.7% as a result of the decision in Hopwood v. Texas, 78 F.3d 932 (5th Cir.), cert. denied, 518 U.S. 1033 (1996), prohibiting the use of race. As of 2001, it was still only 3%. At the same time, African American students constitute 12% of the state's population. USCCR Report at 23, Figure 2.4. 

Objective analyses of the effect of the prohibition on the use of race and the adoption of the percentage plan have concluded that the "absolute number of [minority] students [negatively] affected is substantial." Maria Tienda, Closing The Gap?: Admissions & Enrollments at the Texas Public Flagships Before and After Affirmative Action 14 (Jan. 21, 2003), available at http://www.texastop10.princeton.edu/publications/tienda012103.pdf. "Using the pre-Hopwood distribution as a standard," 980 fewer African Americans and Hispanics enrolled at the University of Texas and 1179 fewer African Americans and Hispanics enrolled at Texas A&M. Id. at 17. 

California: California generally guarantees admission to one of its universities (not necessarily to the school of the applicant's choice) to any applicant in the top 12.5% statewide or the top 4% of each California school. See USCCR Report at Tables 2.2 and 2.3 and accompanying text. Despite these policies, since the abolition of the affirmative action program, 1600 fewer African American, 4000 fewer Latino, and 675 fewer Native Americans have been admitted to the California system. Id. at Table 2.4. "The percentage of students in those minority groups admitted has declined at a time when the percentage of such students in California has increased. [Id. at Table 2.5]. The percentage decline has been particularly acute at the system's flagship institutions. Id. at Figure 2.2." The drop in minority students at graduate schools has been dramatic. Id. at Table 2.6. 

n46 Even apart from percentage plans, as two leading commentators have observed: "it is hard to imagine any admissions policy that, in fact, would be perfectly 'race neutral.' Race is associated with so many aspects of life in the United States that virtually every other attribute of the applicant--SAT scores, high school attended, parents' occupation and education--has, as it were, a racial component." Bok and Bowen, at 31 n.15. 

n47 See e.g. Michael A. Fletcher, Race Neutral Plans Have Limits in Aiding Diversity, Experts Say, WASH. POST, Jan. 17, 2003, at A12; Stephanie Cahill, Skirting the "Race Quota" Label, ABA Journal eReport (Jan. 24, 2003); available at http://www.abanet.org/journal/ereport/j24affirm.html; see also Pacific Legal Foundation, Quotas in UC Admissions Aggressively Challenged, available at http://www.pacificlegal.org/view_PLFCaseDetail.asp?iID=181&sSubIndex=Operation+End+Bias+%2D+%2D+Enforcing+California%27s+Proposition+209&iParentID=8&sParentName=Securing+Individual+Rights; cf. Hi-Voltage Wire Works, Inc. v. City of San Jose, 24 Cal. 4th 537, 560 (2000) (holding that requirement that information about projects available for bids be communicated to potential minority-owned contractors was a "preference" that violated Proposition 209, CAL. CONST. art. I,  31(a)). 

 [*49]  The record in this case demonstrates that a percentage plan would not work in Michigan. The University presented substantial evidence that race-neutral admissions policies would result in a sharp drop in the number of minority students, and the trial court credited that evidence. Pet. App. 41a-42a. While it is true that Michigan's high schools are segregated--a necessary (and troublesome) pre-requisite for such plans to work--they are so segregated that African American students are concentrated in a very small number of schools. For instance, in the mid-1990's (1995-98), 91 of 842 public high schools in Michigan (including alternative schools, juvenile centers, etc.) had enrollments 50% or more African-American; 63 schools were 75% or more African-American (Cir. App. 3645-67; see also id. at 1987-88). n48 

n48 A percentage plan approach is also flawed because it is simply unavailable in many contexts. It is unavailable in graduate schools, and, not surprisingly, plaintiffs do not even mention them in their Grutter brief. Although the United States discusses percentage plans most extensively in its Grutter brief, none of the States cited by the United States utilize percentage plans for their graduate schools. 

Percentage plans are also unavailable in states with few minority high school students. They are not available in states in which high schools are not segregated by race or too segregated by race. They are not available in national universities that draw from all over the country rather than from applicants in a particular state. They are not available in small colleges, particularly those that are highly selective. See Brief for Amici Amherst College et al., Gratz v. Bollinger (No. 02-516) They will not work for Native Americans, who are too few in numbers to be adequately represented in such a plan (see Cir. App. 1965-67). Finally, percentage plans reward students who take less challenging courses or transfer to less challenging schools, thus potentially resulting in the potential admission of unqualified students (Cir. App. 1193). 

 [*50]  The district court's finding that so-called race-neutral plans will not work in Michigan is not seriously challenged by plaintiffs and is fully supported on the record. The contrary suggestion by the United States, largely unsupported by fact, that purportedly race-neutral percentage plans will ensure diversity without considering race is simply wrong and should be rejected. 

CONCLUSION 

For the foregoing reasons, the judgment entered by the district court in favor of the University respondents should be affirmed on all grounds, and the judgment entered by the district court with respect to intervenors' claims should be reversed, or alternatively vacated as moot. 
