While the precise details of my Department’s Vote will be scrutinised by the Oireachtas in due course, I am pleased to have this opportunity to outline to the Dáil the principal features of the 2012 Estimates for my Department. As a result of the significant fiscal deficit which must be closed, we do not have the resources to fund all the services we would like to provide. We are faced with difficult decisions in order to provide the basis for a sustainable approach to the financial situation. In framing budget 2012, our approach has been to do this in as balanced a way as possible. In this context, gross funding for the Department of Arts, Heritage and the Gaeltacht will be €266.99 million in 2012. The allocation for current expenditure is €223.997 million and the capital allocation is €43 million. A further €8.558 million, which includes €7.558 million in current funding and €1 million in capital funding, is provided through Vote 34, the National Gallery.

My Department makes a significant contribution to supporting economic activity and employment throughout the country in the sectors that it directly supports and in the context of cultural tourism. My primary concern is to make every effort to ensure that, within this provision, front-line services provided with funding from my Department are protected as far as possible. Clear priorities must be established to ensure the greatest value is achieved with available resources. We will continue to strive to achieve good outcomes with an even greater focus on value for money in light of these constraints. To the greatest extent possible, savings have been sought through efficiencies rather than through reductions in services. Every saving that can be made from cutting down on overheads continues to be pursued. The current and capital allocations reflect the comprehensive review of expenditure and the review of capital expenditure, respectively, and are informed by the following primary objectives: the promotion of economic growth, sustaining employment through the promotion of the arts, cultural tourism in Gaeltacht areas and in the film and television production sectors, the need to achieve compliance with EU directives, the terms of the programme for Government and supporting North-South co-operation.

I propose to provide some further details on the key areas of expenditure under my direct responsibility and to refer briefly to the ongoing work of my Department in terms of public sector rationalisation and reform. As specific details on capital expenditure allocations were provided in the recent capital investment plan 2012-16 and the Estimates published on Monday, I plan to focus on current expenditure at this time. I will arrange for the breakdown of the current programme allocations to be made available through my Department’s website. With regard to the Department’s arts, culture and film programme area, some €29.552 million or 49% of my Department’s resources is being allocated to the area in 2012. The key focus for the arts and cultural sectors is to protect jobs and stimulate creativity throughout the country. There has been significant investment in art infrastructure in recent years. Accordingly, my priority in the medium term is to ensure that resources are made available to support the operation of these facilities. Funding for arts, culture and film represents a significant contribution not just to sustaining the arts and the national cultural institutions but also to the economically important cultural tourism sector. While the overall reduction will impact on programmes, my Department will continue to place the primary emphasis on prioritising front-line services and supports to artists at the expense of administration, overheads and ancillary costs. The 2012 allocation will facilitate continued support for jobs in the film and television production sector through the Irish Film Board as well as supporting national and regional cultural institutions and fostering and sustaining the cultural tourism sector.

The valuable work of the Arts Council in supporting the intrinsic cultural, tourism and economic value of the arts throughout the country has been recognised and is reflected in the 2012 current allocation of €63.1 million. This is a reduction of 2% on last year’s current funding and allows the council to continue funding arts organisations of varying sizes, from national bodies such as the Abbey Theatre to small, locally based groups, across a range of individual art forms and practices. I am sure Deputy McLellan will be very glad to hear that.

The Arts Council has responded to the reductions in the past two years through greater administrative efficiency and engagement with its client base in demonstrating cost saving methods as well as seeking new funding sources. With the main budgetary emphasis on programming, this will sustain the council’s main arts organisation, keep regional venues open and support festivals and touring. The intention is to allow the council to maintain its support to more than 50 venues, 200 festivals and 400 arts organisations. By supporting these areas, it continues to support employment in communities throughout the country, directly and indirectly. We do this by directly funding artists and organisations and indirectly in the tourism sector and in the wider economy. The council will also step up its work with others to stimulate new jobs.

The 2012 allocation is also an acknowledgement by the Government of the contribution by the arts in employing almost 50,000 people, almost as many as are employed in the ICT sector, who make and deliver arts in communities throughout the country 12 months of the year. The arts are the bedrock of our cultural tourism industry and play a key role as a research and development engine for a smart, creative workforce. Culture Ireland, a division of my Department, will continue to promote Irish artists worldwide with the aim of showcasing our world class strengths and cultural creativity, and restoring Ireland’s global reputation. Building on the focus at the second global Irish economic forum at Dublin Castle, Culture Ireland will continue to promote arts, culture and creative thinking as Ireland’s global calling card and the need for increased strategic focus on Europe and Asia. During the next year, Culture Ireland will focus on planning for Ireland’s EU Presidency cultural programme in January to June 2013.

The priority for the national cultural institutions in 2012 is to keep venues open and to maintain as far as possible front of house services to the public to ensure that what the national cultural institutions offer to the public continues to draw large numbers of people, including overseas and domestic tourists. Day-to-day funding for the national cultural institutions is maintained as close as possible to 2011 levels. Capital funding has been allocated according to priority of need to ensure the safety and preservation of national collections and the continued investment in high quality visitor experiences as part of an integrated cultural tourism drive.

In line with reductions in the public capital programme, the capital allocation for the arts, cultural and film area has been scaled back. The overall funding for the Irish Film Board has been reduced by less than half of the overall reduction to the capital allocation, reflecting its importance from a cultural and employment perspective. In that respect, I recently piloted a Bill through the Oireachtas increasing the spending limit of the Irish Film Board from €200 million to €300 million. The current allocation, at €2.54 million, represents a modest increase of 4% over the 2011 provision. For every euro of Irish Film Board investment, close to €10 is generated. Throughout 2011, Ireland has continued to build on its excellent international reputation for film talent and as a centre of cultural excellence, winning awards and being nominated for some of the international industry’s highest accolades and being selected for some of the highest profile festivals in the world.

Other highlights of the 2012 capital works programme include the redevelopment of Smock Alley Theatre in Dublin, the Waterford Theatre Royal and the Garage Theatre in Monaghan, as well as a major Asgard exhibition that is due to open during the summer and the Irish Museum of Modern Art’s programme at Earlsfort Terrace.

In addition to the €130 million in funding provided for the arts, culture and film sector by my Department, a further €8.558 million is provided through the Vote of the National Gallery. In 2012, the gallery will continue to focus on delivering the best service possible with the available resources. Work will continue in 2012 on the renovation of the historic wings of the gallery. This is a major development for the gallery and while there is an obvious effect in terms of room closures, the gallery will make every effort to minimise the impact for visitors and the upgraded website will be a help in this regard.

Funding of some €48.41 million has been made available in the context of my Department’s heritage programme area. When account is taken of the reductions in my Department’s administration funding, actual reduction and current programme expenditure is 2%.

I remain determined to address the turf cutting issue in a way that is fair, balanced and supportive of those affected. I have ensured sufficient funding is being made available in respect of a redress package for those affected by the cessation of turf cutting on the 53 raised bog special areas of conservation. The allocation for the National Parks and Wildlife Service of €14.397 million is an increase of 3% on the 2011 provision. This underlines the Government’s commitment to ensuring funding will be made available to meet the needs of those who are affected by the cessation of turf cutting on SAC raised bogs under the various schemes the Government has put in place.

The available allocations will allow for a programme of capital works to be undertaken next year at Ireland’s national parks and nature reserves to secure the conservation of our natural heritage and to contribute to their attractiveness as a visitor tourist amenity. Examples of projects include visitor facility centres, visitor walks, capital works for health and safety purposes, removal of invasive alien species to protect vulnerable habitats, and others. Some of the key capital projects to be funded in 2012 include the development of a new walking route to Glenveagh Castle, the restoration of Killarney House and the development of an interpretative centre for Killarney National Park. Heritage functions in my Department will also continue to be supported through the environment fund in 2012. Funding the area of built heritage will focus on protecting those structures that are most at risk, promoting tourism and supporting the work of the heritage council.

A total of €46.306 million has been allocated for the Irish language, the Gaeltacht and the islands. My colleague, the Minister of State, Deputy McGinley, will speak about the relevant aspects of the Irish language, the Gaeltacht and the islands Estimate in his address to the House.

Turning to North-South co-operation, I am committed to developing such co-operation within the broader arts, heritage and commemorative activities of my Department, as well as through the funding of the North-South bodies that come under the aegis of my Department. Provision of €42.718 million has been made in 2012 to support the two North-South implementation bodies, An Foras Teanga, comprising Foras na Gaeilge and the Ulster Scots Agency, and Waterways Ireland. These budgets will be subject to the approval of the North-South Ministerial Council in due course. It is envisaged savings will be achieved through efficiencies and increased focus on front-line services. The Minister of State will speak about An Foras Teanga but for Waterways Ireland the proposed breakdown for the 2012 allocation for this area is a provision of €22.59 million in current funding and capital funding of €4.5 million. This allocation will facilitate the ongoing maintenance and restoration of Ireland’s inland waterways, thereby increasing recreational access along routes and waterways. This expenditure will also assist in attracting increased numbers of overseas visitors and in stimulating business and regeneration in these areas.

I lend my support to the vital work of public sector reform. My departmental officials and I are fully committed to engaging with the public service reform process. We are continually reviewing our practices and structures to enhance coherence and ensure staffing resources continue to be allocated to the areas of greatest need in the Department. In this context, the responsive and flexible allocation of staff to meet specific strategic priorities will continue. The development of shared services will be key to the Department’s reform process and in this regard significant progress has already been made in the area of shared payroll services, IT services and human resources. Work on developing this further will continue into next year.

A key element of my Department’s reform programme is the rationalisation of certain State bodies under its aegis, including proposals in respect of a number of bodies funded from my Department’s Vote group. The Department will not engage with these agencies to give effect to Government policy in this area in accordance with the public service reform plan. I expect to see real benefits come from a less crowded administrative landscape resulting in greater democratic accountability and less duplication of effort. I should also say that shared services have the potential to transform the efficiency of State bodies and my Department is actively pursuing this issue. Sharing back office and other services will offer significant long-term savings in the operation of State bodies generally, and options in this regard are being examined by the Department. This is also being examined for the operation of the Department itself.

This Government has affirmed its commitment to fairness, jobs and reform in this budget. My Department and the sectors it represents will make a significant contribution to getting the country out of the current crisis.
