The times we live in are challenging and difficult and require leadership, inspiration and decisions to improve quality for life for people. On all three counts, the Government has failed. The budget will serve to bring further stress and conflict to families and communities. It will further undermine the years of good work done by community activists. Community development projects are not to be found in every community because they are not needed in every community. Community-based projects provide services that the private or public sectors cannot or simply will not provide. There are no community development projects in Blackrock or Foxrock because they are simply not needed there. People living in more affluent areas have better access to private and public services.

The communities the Government has attacked in the budget depend on services which are already overstretched and underfunded. Public services in working class communities are under strain because of ongoing funding cuts and the moratorium on public service recruitment. The community sector must take up the slack at a time when they have seen their funding disproportionately cut in comparison to the overall cut in Government spending. The Government has attacked every aspect of the community sector. The nature of the sector means that funding comes from several Departments, each of which has introduced cuts which are a massive 24% in the case of the Department of Education and Skills in respect of local drug task forces, 20% in respect of services to tackle educational disadvantage and 43% in respect of the provision of training by FÁS, yet funding for the Secret Service remains untouched. I often wonder on what that money is spent — it may be on hard hats, high collars and dark sunglasses for spies. Perhaps the Minister for Justice and Equality might tell us.

There is no need to keep an eye on me; I am in the House and the Minister can keep an eye on me, while I keep an eye on him.

The local drugs task forces have seen their budgets cut by 7%, or a total of €2 million. Projects have already suffered serious cuts in the past three budgets, many of which will be compounded by cuts to HSE mainstream funding. The Government has purposely targeted those who were long-term unemployed or in recovery from drug addiction. It has slashed the budgets for community employment schemes. The effect of these cuts will be felt by those providing essential services in communities and receiving vital training and education services. The Government is cutting the training and materials grant by 66% to €500 per participant in community employment schemes. This will have a serious impact in trying to move people from unemployment to employment. The Government managed to increase the funding for the Tús scheme which has no training and education component. It also increased the funding for JobBridge which has turned out to be a failed entity. The community employment scheme, however, which has been tried and tested has fallen victim to the axe and the funding for the community services programme is being cut by €2 million. This programme provides services, including community resources centres, sports centres and senior citizens care services.

The list is long and the cuts are callous. The Government must also understand cuts do not occur in isolation. Those who fell victim to the cuts in social welfare, reduced health services and increased class sizes all depend on these services more and more. The decisions will affect marginalised communities far more than the communities from which many Government Ministers come. The cuts are happening while €82 million lies untouched in the dormant accounts fund. The Government can rest assured that people are hurting, but they are not beaten yet. I pay tribute to the communities which will have to endure the cuts and the community activists who work day and night to protect, defend and sustain their communities. In many cases, they are the glue that keeps families and communities together.

I had the honour and privilege yesterday of meeting a delegation of young children from the Kilbarrack community development programme. They visited the Dáil and presented us with “A Book of Grievance and Hope” which include the thoughts, hopes and fears of young children. One child wrote, “We can’t send money to Trócaire this year.” One of the saddest thoughts reads, “My mam is sad all the time,” while a little girl called Chantelle wrote, “All I want for Christmas is fairness.” Finally, a young child from this city wrote, “My family is having a poor Christmas this year.” The budget will only increase the level of poverty and unfairness, but Sinn Féin will rise to the challenge of working with these communities.

The budget proposals announced by the Minister for Public Expenditure and Reform on Monday attempted to bankrupt local government, which Sinn Féin supports, as it is an essential part of democracy and provides services for local people. Local authorities have become over-dependent on the grant from central government to provide these services. The fund was essential, but now it has been cut by a massive 84%. This cut is made even greater when account is taken of the added cut of €4.5 million in the allocation for local roads and the cancellation of the local improvement scheme for roads. These cuts allow the Government to introduce the draconian household charge. Next week the Household Charge Bill will be introduced by the Government and Sinn Féin will do its utmost to stop it becoming law. The Government is attempting to force it through the Dáil before Christmas. This poll tax will be actively opposed by the public the length and breadth of the State. The household charge is unjust, unsustainable and unforgivable. On the one hand, consecutive Governments ensured local councils became dependent on central government for their funding and now the Government is cutting virtually all funding to councils. The Government’s own calculations would have us believe the household charge, if operational, will raise €160 million. This is a huge gamble. Any serious non-payment campaign will reduce this amount. Sinn Féin proposes a progressive tax system should fund local government and that it should be done on a phased basis.

The budget is a death sentence for many local authorities which are struggling to balance their books. This was proved only this week when the largest local authority in the State, Dublin City Council, decided to sell off the domestic waste collection service so as to raise much needed funds. This was done against the wishes of city councillors who on no less than three occasions voted to retain the service in council ownership. The irony is that Labour Party councillors voted in favour of the Sinn Féin motion but their masters in government subjected the city council to huge cuts in funding. It is both ironic and hypocritical.

The Government has cut funding for water services by 14% when we are supposed to be stopping leaks. This comes at a time when the Government is committed to introducing water rates. The capital budget for the Department of the Environment, Community and Local Government has been cut by €287 million. This includes cuts in the investment in water services of €65 million and in the rural water programme by €10 million, while there is no commitment to investing in water harvesting which aims to reuse rain water.

I take the opportunity to add my voice to those demanding that the Government reverse the cut in disability allowance. I received a telephone call from a constituent who is also a member of the National Disability Authority, urging the Government to call off its review and simply reverse the cut. We cannot cancel the need for equality. I notice that Deputy Kathleen Lynch, Minister of State with responsibility for disability services, has cancelled tomorrow’s meeting with the National Disability Authority. It is said a week is a long time in politics; it has been a long week for the Labour Party which is beginning to feel the heat.

The budget is a cold, callous and premeditated attack on jobs, the disabled, working families and marginalised communities. The challenge for us is to organise with the people to ensure the Government gets the same short, sharp shock Fianna Fáil received in February.
