I am glad and sad to speak on the budget. I am sad that we find ourselves in this situation and that the people must shoulder the burden they are expected to carry. I am also sad because those who were in government before the Government ran away from their responsibilities. They remind me of the guy who went into a pub, ordered a drink for everyone in the house, went to the washroom, got out the window and ran away. It happened most spectacularly in the past 15 years. Do Members remember the pristine condition the country was in in 1997 when the outgoing Government left office with a budgetary surplus?

The Deputy does not remember because he had his eye on something else at the time. There was a budgetary surplus and the economy was in pristine condition. What did the incoming Government do with it? Like the guys who built the Tower of Babel, it built people’s expectations and handed out money left, right and centre——

——and bought the elections of 2002 and 2007. There was no end to the money on offer. It created an expectation that this would work, but it did not and, like the people who built the Tower of Babel, the Opposition is now speaking in diverse tongues and its members cannot understand one another. I am not surprised by this, but they have certainly run away.

What really takes me to the fair is when I hear Opposition spokespersons who were in government only ten months ago expressing surprise that there has not been a transformation in the past ten months. We are asked on a regular basis why the economic problems have not been solved. They took 15 years to bury the economy up to its ears. They are like the truck driver who drove into a swamp and then, when the relief driver arrived on the scene, told him to get the truck out. I am surprised that they have not apologised. I would have expected this of Opposition spokespersons in the party of which Deputy Mattie McGrath was previously a member. I hope he will make the apology on their behalf since they are not present. I would have thought they would apologise for leaving the country in such an appallilng mess. However, they have now reverted to a series of soundbites, expressing baby-like surprise and wondering about the awful state the economy is in and asking why the Government has not done something about it in the past ten months.

I compliment Sinn Féin on the constructive way in which it has gone about its business in Northern Ireland. It has taken its responsibilities seriously and, with its coalition partners, set about shrinking that economy because there is no money available. It accepted the need to do this, and I would like to see it do the same here by applying the same rules and principles and recognising that the people face a serious problem. Rhetoric will not solve the problem. All of the decisions taken by the Government, sad though they are, had to be taken simply because there was nothing else it could do.

I hear Members on the other side of the House saying there should be a stimulus package; let us inject more money into the economy. Where is the money about which they are talking about? Do they not know the country is broke? Do they not know what this entails? Do they not know the sacrifices the people must make in order to drag the country out of the mess it is in?

The Deputy was speaking in diverse tongues before it because he saw the opportunity to jump overboard when it suited him. He would jump back in again if he thought the boat was big enough to carry the lot of them. It is now a smaller boat which will take fewer people.

The Deputy must also accept responsibility and should send for his former colleagues, ring or text them to hear the other side of the story. Let us see what he has to say about this. Since members of the main Opposition party are not present, on their behalf, we should echo an apology to the people for what they did. The people will pay for an awful long time to come.

Do people remember what the previous Government did? There has been much talk about child benefit. It is appalling that we have to do what we must do. What did it do? In 2002 it sent a letter and a cheque to every mother of every child in the country for up to €1,000, €2,000 in some cases, in respect of an increase in benefit one week before the general election. I can only think it was naivety on the part of the governing party which did not think it would have any effect on the election results. In 2007 it had another go. It was the general election of 2002 which broke the country because it was calculated to secure an overall majority for Fianna Fáil which is what it wanted at the time. If Fianna Fáil had got that, it would have treated the people to something else afterwards. Anyway, what the party did then was to run further before the storm, spending more money, saying it was a great thing and that Fianna Fáil was magic, that it knew how do to it. Well, that was not the case and it was only when Mr. Chopra arrived and looked at the accounts that he asked what was this off balance sheet recording of debt. It was apparently accepted practice in the past but he said no, we could not have that anymore. Reality dawned.

I compliment the former Minister for Finance, the late Brian Lenihan. He took very courageous decisions. I do not know how much support he got from his colleagues but he took those decisions because he realised the reality. Reality is what we face now, and more of it, and it will take another four or five years before we work our way out of it. It will mean everything going right and there will be occasions between now and the end of the four or five year period when we must revise and review again and again, much in the same way President Roosevelt did in the USA in the 1930s, where again and again he had to explain to the people what the problem was and that he understood what was happening and was trying to help.

John Steinbeck wrote The Grapes of Wrath, and we hear a lot of expressions about anger and all the angry people out there; there are many people in Government angry about having to face what we face now. He called it The Grapes of Wrath; he could have called it The Fruits of Anger but anger does not put bread on the table. It never did and it never will. I would hope there would be a realisation on the part of the main party in Opposition that what it did to this country is appalling and that it should accept responsibility for it so we could move forward together in the clear knowledge we are going in the right direction.
