We would all agree that in the lead-up to the budget many people were very frightened about what was coming down the tracks and were very nervous about the budget. The newspapers were full of leaks, with the journalists stating they were coming from Ministers and their advisers. People are scared for many reasons, with most of them concerned about how they will pay the bills. Many people are also frightened about their jobs. People with a few bob in the bank are concerned about the euro going bust.

Ministers assured anyone who wanted to listen to them that it would be a reforming budget, with one Minister suggesting it would not be as bad as one thought and that one might even consider taking a holiday. Words and phrases such as “adjustments”, “austerity”, “painful process”, “fiscal adjustment”, “consolidation”, “sharing the burden” and “heavy lifting” punctuated the rhetoric. When we hear the word “reform” one thinks of improving what currently exists, enhancing something, perhaps abolishing a wrong or bringing about change. However, I do not see this in the budget. To call the budget reforming is wrong.

In his television address the Taoiseach stated the budget would seek to look after the most vulnerable in society. I presume he had a look at the budget but the cuts announced in it are being imposed on schools, teachers, the elderly, lone parents, young people and those with a disability so I do not know where the Taoiseach was coming from on this. If there is any guilt it is that the Government is guilty of implementing the same ill-thought out regressive policies of its predecessor. This is not what people voted for. They voted for change and they thought there would be a difference.

People are still scared. They are adding up the figures and wondering what they can cut back on in their shopping baskets. They will also face new bills with regard to sending their children to school. The budget will undermine the rights of children and young people with regard to their access to a fair standard of education. It is a Minister of the Labour Party who will oversee the implementation of these cuts. We have seen a complete U-turn on pre-election promises.

The Minister has also increased the third level contribution fee by €250. Changes to fees and maintenance support will prevent many students from middle income backgrounds availing of postgraduate courses. Approximately 9,000 students receive grants from local authorities for masters and postgraduate courses. Many of these students earn very low incomes and we have all dealt with people trying to fill in CAO forms. Those attending universities and institutes of technology receive support of €3,120.

The main point I wish to make is with regard to guidance counsellors. I cannot understand why the Minister is making a cut to this service. This is a time when guidance counselling is required. Guidance councillors provide not only career guidance but also counselling and I cannot understand this cut. They deal with children who have suffered bereavement, experience anxiety or depression, who have anger management issues, who suffer bullying or who self harm. The Minister speaks about removing guidance councillors from the system and this does not make sense. With regard to positive changes, these will not be experienced by vulnerable people and this is an area the Minister should reconsider.
