I would need a lot more than 17 minutes to give out about the Government. However, I welcome the opportunity to speak about the budget. There has been a lot of talk in the media and criticism across the board about the unfairness of it. Most of the bad news was given out on Monday by the Minister for Public Expenditure and Reform, Deputy Brendan Howlin, who represented the Labour Party. The Minister for Finance, Deputy Michael Noonan, received all the kudos in the newspapers today for being more fair. It seems strange that the Labour Party is not more concerned about the less well-off and poor people in society.

I have served with the Minister for Public Expenditure and Reform, Deputy Brendan Howlin, in County Wexford for the past 29 years when we both became Members of the Houses of the Oireachtas. I have always worked reasonably well with him and we have always worked for the betterment of the ordinary people of County Wexford. That is why it baffles me that he made a statement on Monday that he was cutting the payment to people with disabilities — in some cases, by almost 100%. I am glad the Minister for Finance said last night that the Government would look at the issue again. This morning the Taoiseach said young people reaching the age of 16 years and moving from domiciliary care allowance would receive disability benefit.

I have an interest in this matter in that I have a daughter in a wheelchair who is in receipt of disability benefit. She said to me on Monday night that she thought this decision was very unfair, even though she would not be affected by it. Many people in wheelchairs and with disabilities depend on this money for reasons different from those of able bodied people. Many of daughter’s friends spend a lot of money on taxis because they are not able to drive. Some of them also have special food requirements, while others need the extra few bob for different reasons.

I spoke to the Minister for Public Expenditure and Reform yesterday evening about this issue and welcome the fact there is to be a change. As I do not think there has been a complete change, I urge the Taoiseach, the Minister for Finance and the Minister for Public Expenditure and Reform to row back completely on this decision.

It is almost impossible for people to find jobs, but it is completely impossible for people with disabilities to find them. Very few in the disability sector would be in a position to find a job. I asked the Minister for Public Expenditure and Reform last night to look seriously at increasing the quota for people with disabilities in local authorities, other public bodies and Departments. Currently, it stands at 3%, but many Government organisations and bodies and local authorities are not meeting that figure which I hope the Minister will increasing to perhaps 10%. The embargo on recruitment should not apply to people with disabilities and there should be a special interview process throughout the country. Local authorities and Government bodies should be encouraged to employ people with disabilities.

It is welcome that a decision has been made to row back some of the way on the issue of disability benefit. I hope a decision will be made in the coming days the row back fully on it. I am amazed by the Minister for Social Protection, Deputy Joan Burton, and the Minister for Public Expenditure and Reform being members of the Labour Party. I remember last year when the previous Government cut the rate of disability benefit from €196 to €188, the same individuals jumped up and down and said we did not care about people with disabilities.

Before the debate adjourned, I was about to make a point about the six weeks reduction in the fuel allowance. While I welcome the Taoiseach’s announcement this morning to the effect that he will reverse the decision on disability payments, I call on the Cabinet to reconsider the fuel allowance issue. As the Minister of State, Deputy Brian Hayes, knows, this allowance is means tested and those who qualify for it must meet every criteria. To reduce it by six weeks is not in the best interests of old people in particular.

I welcome the announcement by the Minister of State, Deputy Ring, on sports grants. Last year, we argued with the late Mr. Brian Lenihan that these grants should have been introduced on a smaller scale. I welcome that the Minister of State will re-introduce sports grants and I hope the details will be made available as quickly as possible to allow sporting organisations to apply. I also hope that the money will be spread more evenly instead of large sums being given to the major stadia. I look with interest to my county of Wexford where a significant amount of money was spent on Wexford Park, yet health and safety officers have reduced its capacity from 25,000 people to approximately 15,000. With this in mind, I wonder why we were allowed to spend that level of money in the first instance.

Will the Government consider the question of community employment, CE, and internship schemes? CE schemes are important for rural Ireland and many organisations avail of them. The reduction in the available grant aid for such schemes will cause problems. The amount of money involved is not large, but the funds for retraining and materials formed an important element of the schemes.

Will the Minister for Health, Deputy Reilly, spell out the cuts in his portfolio? There seem to be many hidden cuts. That people in their 90s have been forced to go to court to get a decision on the closure of the Abbeyleix Community Hospital is disgraceful. I hope the situation can be resolved during the next 12 weeks, the time allocated by the judge today. It is not a good omen that older people in nursing homes have been forced under this Government to go to court to protect their rights.

Today saw 40 people, the most ever, on trolleys in Wexford hospital. When we were in government last year and 20 or 25 people were on trolleys, the then Opposition Deputies from my county were very agitated about it and we were getting abuse from that side of the House, yet nearly twice that number are now on trolleys and the Minister is discussing further cuts in the health service. I do not know what he intends to do, but further cuts will impinge on those who must go to hospital.

This is not a fair budget, but I welcome the Taoiseach’s announcement this morning. I hope people in receipt of disability payments will continue to receive €188 per week. They are special people who require special foods and must avail of taxis because most of them are unable to drive. They are in no position to take any reduction in the amount of money they receive. I welcome the Taoiseach’s change of heart.
