I am sorry that the young people in the Visitors’ Gallery, whom the Minister for Education and Skills addressed a few minutes ago, have now left. I notice, however, that another group of young people are in the Visitors’ Gallery. I would say this them: we have just had a talk from the Minister for Education and Skills who is now leaving the Chamber. He boasted about all he was going to do for education in future, but this is the Minister who solemnly signed a pledge not to increase registration fees before the eyes of the whole country.

He brazenly renegued on that promise within weeks of making it. I hope all his fine promises about what he is going to do for education will come to pass. That is the context in which he must be judged.

The point about it is that he was found deliberately telling lies to the people.

When the Government introduced its jobs initiative last spring, it had only just taken office. At the time, I took a constructive approach and I think it will be judged as such. The Government had only just been elected and I wished them a fair wind. I had reservations on how they were going about job creation, but nevertheless I was prepared to give them a chance. I praised what I agreed with in their approach and said I hoped it would work out because, God knows, it is in all our interests that this country should be able to create jobs thus enabling our people to work again and have a good standard of living here. At the time, the Government thanked me for my constructive approach and said they were willing to be judged on the results. We are now beginning to see the results but, unfortunately, some of my worst fears have been realised.

The objective of a jobs strategy it to reduce unemployment but since that strategy was introduced unemployment has risen by almost 10,000. That is not counting the increased number of people who have gone on the various job training schemes the Government has set up. Nor does it include the accelerated rate of emigration at the rate of 100 per day, according to all the anecdotal evidence. Some bodies are predicting that emigration could rise to as much as 200 a day over the next 12 months. It would appear therefore that the Government’s jobs strategy has flopped faster than a fat man chasing a moving vehicle. The Government’s jobs strategy is a miserable, abject and pitiable failure. That has now been demonstrated beyond any shadow of doubt by the figures we have from the Central Statistics Office.

Do not take my word for it. Mr. Mark Fielding, the CEO of ISME, represents the small and medium business sector employing 665,000 people. In a statement issued on 24 November, after the Government had announced its micro-credit scheme for the 129th time, Mr. Fielding said:

This Government needs to start taking its role more seriously and desist from participating in public relations stunts. What is required is less waffle, more action.

That quotation is not from me or other members of the Opposition, it is from someone representing 665,000 people in the small business sector. The clue to the Government’s strategy — or, rather, the lack of it — can be found by comparing the Fine Gael and Labour Party election manifestos. Everyone, with the possible exception of Sinn Féin — I cannot speak for them — agrees with the debt reduction strategy that has been imposed on us from outside. We have choices, however, as to how we reduce the deficit by balancing tax increases against expenditure cuts. The Fine Gael election manifesto proposed a ratio of 75:25 for expenditure cuts and tax increases.

The Labour manifesto proposed a 50:50 ratio, with 50% coming from expenditure cuts and 50% from raised taxes. The result, believe it or not, is a division of 62.5% coming from expenditure cuts and 37.5% coming from taxes, an almost exact splitting of the difference. In other words, it is a squalid compromise. Instead of any coherent strategy, what we have is a strategy that can be agreed by a majority of backbenchers on both sides. It is not budgeting by strategy but budgeting by horse trading. One would find no more coherence in the Government strategy than one would in a bunch of fireworks.

In my praise for the Government’s jobs initiative, I should have remembered the words of Jonathan Swift, who said “Expect nothing and you will not be disappointed.” We have a compromise rather than a coherent strategy at a time when the country is in great peril. Deputies do not have to take my word for it as The Irish Times, no friend of Fianna Fáil, had an editorial yesterday stating “the eventual [budgetary] package had more to do with conflicting ministerial and backbench demands than economic vision.” It went on to describe the budget as “underwhelming” with “little or no sense of unified vision” and so on. Yesterday, the Irish Independent described the budget as a “mishmash” of measures to which the two Government partners could be persuaded rather than a coherent strategy. Deputies do not need to take my word on the matter.

I have heard my constituency colleague, Deputy Noonan, when on this side of the House describe various budgets as pantomime horses and such. This is not even a pantomime horse and it would be an exaggeration to describe it as a pantomime donkey, with the two ends ungainly parcelled, sticking out with a vacuum in the middle. If the Government had a strategy — it argues that job creation is central to a strategy — how can we explain such wonderful job creation wheezes as the 2% increase in the VAT rate? In introducing the jobs initiative earlier this year, the Government stated that the panacea would be a reduction in VAT. We are told this is a job creation budget but central to revenue raising measures is an increase in VAT. Was the Government wrong then or is it wrong now? The two strategies contradict each other directly.

Conventional wisdom would indicate that consumption taxes are less destructive of employment than direct raising of income taxes, and I agree with that. The circumstances of each case must be considered separately. I listened to the Taoiseach this morning but I do not believe he fully comprehends this matter. The export-led growth strategy is beginning to falter seriously, and all one must do to see evidence of it is consider the diminishing trade balance. A couple of years ago the trade balance of exports over imports was 52% but it decreased this year to approximately 4.5%, which is a third of what was provided for at the start of the year. The export boom is beginning to peter out.

There has never been a time in our history when it has been more vital to stimulate the domestic Irish economy. Retail sales have fallen for 44 successive months, and one would imagine this is hardly the time to impose a hike of 2% in the VAT rate. Not only is this taxation strategy economically illiterate in Ireland’s current financial circumstances, it is also socially unjust. There are many people on social welfare or on very low incomes, who do not have a taxable income and cannot avoid paying VAT. By definition, it is a regressive tax, and the poorer a person, the greater the percentage of income paid in indirect tax. That is an economic reality that is widely recognised.

This time last year the current Minister for Social Protection, Deputy Joan Burton, when speaking from the Opposition benches rejoiced in the fact that the then Minister for Finance, the late Mr. Brian Lenihan, had rowed back on an earlier budgetary strategy. She said it was “with his tail between his legs” that he removed the 0.5% VAT increase which she had described as the “single most disastrous action he took in the 2009 budget.” It was a disastrous and Earth-shattering mistake for the late Mr. Brian Lenihan to increase VAT from 21% to 21.5% but there is now no problem in increasing VAT from 21% to 23%. That is raising hypocrisy to the level of a crusade.

The Sunday Business Post, which is an objective observer, stated on 4 December that the decision by the Government to increase VAT smacks of a calculation about the impact of income taxes on electoral fortunes rather than a coherent plan to revive the economy. That newspaper has no axe to grind. The Taoiseach recently suggested there was no difference in the choice of increasing income taxes and increasing consumption taxes. He suggested that hikes in VAT would give people more choice. I know the Taoiseach personally and he has always had his feet on the ground since coming to the House. I am sorry to see that after nine months in office, he is suffering from a degree of delusion that would make the great Walter Mitty look unimaginative.

That is how detached from reality the Taoiseach has become. The increase in VAT is just one job creation wheeze, and another is the savage cut in capital expenditure as a proportion of total expenditure cut. I will again refer to a person in the media who has no axe to grind, Mr. Dan O’Brien, the respected economic commentator in The Irish Times. On 5 November, referring to the Government’s plan outlining the capital and current expenditure cuts, he indicated:

The new plan contains little indication of radical departures. For instance, the Government has made much of the need to make “strategic” capital investments, both as a means of raising the economy’s growth potential and of creating jobs. The coalition — rightly or wrongly — believes there are plenty of projects that can achieve both objectives. Despite this, capital spending is to be cut sharply, having already been cut much more than other areas of expenditure. A radical Government would have cut less productive spending and shifted the money saved into the capital budget but that is not going to happen.

It is interesting that very famous politicians here, until very recently, were vehemently opposed in principle to the entire notion of cutting capital expenditure. For example, in July last year, not so long ago, a famous politician, when capital expenditure was to be reduced to a higher base than it is currently, stated:

Reductions in capital spending are extremely disappointing. They will have a profound effect on economic activity and job creation.

I could set a question in a quiz asking if this was Deputy Gerry Adams, Deputy Michéal Martin, somebody from the left or then Senator Shane Ross.

No, it was the current Minister for Finance, Deputy Noonan.


Another equally famous politician said that cuts in capital spending undermine the future capacity of this economy.


Guess who it was? He is sitting directly across from me. It is the Minister, Deputy Richard Bruton. Could it have been him only a few short months ago?

Another fantastic job creation wheeze is the notion of pushing the cost of redundancy on to employers. Companies are downsizing and I know a number of small and medium enterprises which are losing money and reducing costs to survive. The Government sees businesses in a bad position and losing money so it will put extra costs on them.


What the Government does not seem to realise, unfortunately, is that the rebate on redundancy payments comes from the social insurance fund, and who pays into the social insurance fund by and large but employers. Employers who pay into the social insurance fund are now expected to pay on the double to the extent of 85% when someone becomes redundant. I cannot calculate the exact sum but it is roughly estimated that this could impose up to €250 million on the backs of small, struggling SMEs at a time when they are literally surviving from week to week if not from day to day. The Government has sought to justify it on the basis that there is no rebate in the UK, but the rates of redundancy there are far less, and even with a 60% rebate it was costing far more to make a person redundant in this country than it was in the UK. Now it will cost two and a half times as much to make a person redundant in this country than it does in the UK. That is a comparative disadvantage. It must be seen as a competitiveness issue——


——because it is anti-competitive.


It is blatantly thoughtless and anti-competitive. The Government also mentioned such countries as Sweden and the Netherlands where there is no rebate, but there is no redundancy system similar to this country in those countries. The system there is entirely different. By comparing apples with oranges one is trying to defend the indefensible. It will now cost two and a half times more to make a person redundant in this little country than in the country just across the water.


The Government is apparently relying on austerity by itself without any stimulus, plan or job creation measures to get this country through the current crisis. It is like a medieval doctor who used invariably to treat patients by applying leeches to suck out the blood of patients. If the patient did not recover, one got another leech to suck out the blood again.


Eventually, when there is no blood left, the patient dies.


That is the Government’s strategy for pulling the country out of its present economic travails. Let us face it; it will not work. Everyone agrees that austerity alone will not do the job. That is widely accepted by all economic commentators on all sides of the political divide. When Roosevelt took America off the gold standard, he was influenced by the advice of one of his top advisers who said that America could not be crucified on a cross of gold, but Ireland cannot be crucified on a cross of austerity either. What we need is austerity with imagination.


The reaction of the various members of the Government to the situation is instructive. In recent weeks the Minister for Social Protection, Deputy Joan Burton, has been behaving like a modern day version of the 1960s character, Maxwell Smart, hiding in corridors waiting for a journalist to pass——


——to say that by the way the Labour Party is stopping Fine Gael doing A, B and C and to make sure to print that Labour did it and that the Minister, Deputy Joan Burton, led the charge.


The Minister for Health is acting like a pantomime villain. If one does not give him his way, he will huff and puff and blow the hospitals down.



I know it is Christmas but he looks and acts like a pantomime villain.


The Minister for Transport, Tourism and Sport, Deputy Varadkar — the man who seems to be permanently poised between a platitude and a peccadillo — is turning himself into a latter day Marie Antoinette and giving a modern day version of “Let them eat cake”.


The Taoiseach is a man who does not care which way the car is going once he is in the driver’s seat.


My constituency colleague, the unflappable Minister for Finance, Deputy Michael Noonan, acts as if——



——he does not have a care in the world and everything is perfect in the garden.


He is a tremendous communicator. I will give him full credit for that. I must strike a rather sour note.


This morning, unfortunately, after a long period of absence and I presume inactivity, because I cannot remember what he is responsible for, the Minister for whatever, Deputy Rabbitte, came to the House and proceeded to laugh and sneer at our questions about the disabled, guidance teachers and how the poor are impacted on——


I remember when Deputy Rabbitte ceased to be a Minister. He was the dumb waiter in the Government led by the then Taoiseach, Mr. John Bruton. He was the super junior Minister who could not talk at Cabinet meetings.


He was there without any great effect and when he ceased to be a Minister, one of his media groupies wrote an article about him to the effect that there is one thing one could say about Deputy Pat Rabbitte, that he grew in office. He is growing again but the economy is shrinking.


The Minister, Deputy Rabbitte, looks very tired because he has been on a long journey. It is a long journey from left wing, revolutionary Marxist to chief cheerleader for the right wing of Fine Gael. I will hand over to my colleague, Deputy Kirk.


I will conclude the great budget debate. Unfortunately, the lemmings are in charge and they are leading the people towards the cliff rather than away from it.
