For many reasons it is highly appropriate that Deputies have paid tribute to the late Brian Lenihan during their contributions to this budget debate. No Minister for Finance has ever faced the combination of dramatic challenges which confronted him during his two and a half years in that office. The scale of the problems and the speed with which they kept changing placed an enormous burden on him. Nonetheless he confronted them with urgency and vigour. He always acted in good faith and was motivated by the republicanism which has always been a proud hallmark of his family. In preparing last year’s budget he, along with all of his colleagues, was determined to set out a clear framework for restoring Ireland’s fiscal and economic health.

The Minister for Finance, Deputy Noonan, and the Minister for Public Expenditure and Reform, Deputy Howlin, together with the Taoiseach, the Tánaiste and the Minister in the Chamber, Deputy Rabbitte, have spoken repeatedly of how the budget announced last year has succeeded in showing the world that Ireland is on the right track in consolidating its budget. They have also pointed out how economic growth returned while that budget was in operation. Of course, they have not managed to acknowledge that they voted and campaigned against the budget that they now spend so much time claiming credit for. Although in a position to do anything they wanted, they chose to leave it unaltered in any significant way.

It is impossible to listen to the Government contributions to this debate and fail to remember what the same people were saying when they were looking for votes. Last year the Taoiseach stood in this spot and condemned the budget as “stale, unfair and out of touch”, “devoid of hope, ideas and imagination” and he of course called for the immediate burning of bondholders. On Sunday he praised that budget for having “restored confidence”. Before he assumed his current responsibilities, the Minister, Deputy Howlin, said of the budget, “I have listened to many budget speeches in this House over the years but none was more disingenuous and more dishonest”. He attacked education charges and said the claims made for the budget reminded him of the theory of “the big lie” as contained in Mein Kampf. On Monday that budget was, for him, merely a “first step”.

The truth is that over the last nine months this Government has taken few significant decisions and has coasted on the back of plans already in place or ready to go. Its most hyped initiative, the downgraded jobs budget, has damaged investment and cost jobs. In spite of having a secure majority, which will survive even in the unlikely event that more Labour backbenchers remember the policies they stood on, the Government has been timid and obsessed with political manoeuvring. Never before has a Government spent so much time praising itself while actually doing so little.

At the end of a long month of leaks and press conferences we have in the last two days finally seen exactly how Fine Gael and Labour intend to govern. We have finally seen them move from vague generalities to taking real decisions. We no longer have to take them at their word, and we can see the cold, hard facts of what are their priorities. This is their budget. They spent six months preparing it and have rolled out the largest number of media briefings, both official and anonymous, ever used to promote a budget. The Minister, Deputy Howlin, has said that he personally examined every area of spending and that the decisions taken are based on political priorities. The Minister, Deputy Noonan, has confirmed that the Government was entirely free to make its own decisions within a set deficit target. Both the Taoiseach and Tánaiste have confirmed that they support this target and would want to hit it irrespective of where the State is borrowing its money.

The Government has choices to make and is accountable for them. Through the mountain of detail and the hours of announcements, what has emerged is a deeply unfair and damaging budget. This budget is the most regressive in years, it will cost jobs, it breaks an unprecedented number of promises made only months ago and it may lead to a serious shortfall in Government revenues as soon as early next year. It will not promote recovery, it will endanger the achievement of fiscal targets and it will shift an unfair burden on to groups which are least able to manage. It shows a Government which is wasting an enormous amount of public goodwill as it shows a self-righteousness which is on display every day in this Chamber.

The single most important element which will create jobs and ease fiscal pressures is overall economic growth. We support the fiscal target set in the budget. It is a reasonable compromise between the need to get to a sustainable deficit level and to protect the potential for growth in the economy. We set out a detailed series of budget proposals that were constructive and credible and which had been costed. Some of them have been adopted by the Government, which we welcome. We accepted fully that unpopular choices were required and rejected the tactics followed by the Government when in opposition of pretending that there were easy solutions to even the hardest of problems.

Within the overall target for next year, many approaches can be taken. Measures could be targeted in order that they would do as little damage as possible to the potential for growth and job creation. Last week I directly asked the Taoiseach about the Government’s forecast for growth in 2012. The Taoiseach and the Minister for Finance, Deputy Michael Noonan, confirmed that they were sticking to a growth target of 1.6% as per the forecast made. Yesterday the figure was reduced to 1.3%, which was probably justified by the latest forecasts for the European and global economies. It is unclear why it took until yesterday to announce this. Perhaps Ministers were concerned that it would raise too many questions during their cavalcade of press conferences in recent weeks.

Of much more serious concern is the fact that the measures announced in recent days are likely to cause further downward pressures on growth. When it comes to spending cuts and revenue raising, not all measures have the same impact on the broader economy. A consistent theme of the spending plans and tax measures proposed is that they include nothing significant to promote growth. However, they include many measures which might cause serious damage. The accelerated cut in capital spending, the undermining of investment by pension funds and the VAT increase are highly likely to depress economic activity beyond the figures produced yesterday. Everyone knows that VAT returns pose the biggest concern for the Exchequer. They are well behind projections, while underlying consumer confidence is weak. The overall deficit target cannot be met if VAT returns continue to underperform and if the increase drives consumers away from already hard-pressed shops.

We are now in the bizarre position where the Government is making directly contradictory claims about VAT changes in different parts of its budget. When it was cutting VAT for selected industries in June, it claimed that thousands of jobs would result. It stated cutting VAT was the best way to create jobs. Now, when it is front-loading VAT increases of 2% on a much wider range of goods and services, it claims there will be no impact on the economy. The Minister has claimed that he is increasing VAT because of the extent to which he cares about jobs. The failure to include any economic impact of the VAT increase in the budget figures directly undermines their credibility. The Government predicts the increase will yield €670 million but does not take into consideration the impact of the increase on sales, which will be particularly evident in Border counties. This has arisen solely because Fine Gael wants to be able to claim it has left income tax untouched. Instead of targeting revenue measures at the highest earners as we proposed, it was decided to rely on the most regressive tax, the one which, increasingly, is under-performing. This has introduced uncertainty into the programme of fiscal consolidation which the Government may come to rue.

There is a complete lack of a stimulus or investment in the growth potential of the economy. Fine Gael’s €7 billion NewERA is missing, as are the billions which the Labour Party stated would be pouring into the economy from its strategic investment bank. There will be projects bearing these brand names, but they will be minor side projects with no serious national impact. If the Government wants to promote growth, it should adopt our policy and replace the pension levy with an investment fund which would combine a compulsory investment by the pensions industry with State resources. The billions involved would stop damage being caused by the levy and provide major resources for job creation investments. It would also yield a return for the industry rather than penalising pensioners of Tara Mines and other companies. Effectively, the Government’s policy on growth is to hope it turns up in the international economy and helps our exporters, at which point it will no doubt be ready to claim credit for it. In other areas the budget will have an active and immediate impact, mostly for the worse.

All Ministers have claimed that creating jobs is a core objective of the budget. Unfortunately, that is nonsense. The net effect of the budget will be, unequivocally, the loss of more jobs. A contraction of net employment in 2012 is confirmed in the budget documentation. This is more of what we heard from the Government at the time of announcement of its downgraded jobs budget. The net €250 million the Government took out of the economy this year, especially from pensioners, has cost jobs. In spite of the clear evidence to the contrary, the Taoiseach claimed on Sunday that tens of thousands of jobs had been created when unemployment had grown consistently in the past nine months. The obsession with trying to spin its record to date has led to the ludicrous claim that the jobs initiative has had a big impact on tourism. First, the increase in tourist traffic began well in advance of the announcement of the jobs initiative. Second, a major factor is the absence of an ash cloud this year. The Minister for Transport, Tourism and Sport, Deputy Leo Varadkar, has many talents, but the ability to control Icelandic volcanoes is not one of them.

The measures announced in the past two days to aid the export and construction sector are welcome, but, once again, they are being over-spun. They are so small that the budget documentation shows them as having no impact on growth or employment. They are also accompanied by an accelerated cut in capital spending. The €750 million being cut is substantially bigger than any stimulus package announced yesterday. The net effect of the changes will be a further fall in construction employment, which no amount of spinning can cover up.

Minister after Minister has appeared in recent days to say job creation is the number one priority, but that does not stand up to even the most basic scrutiny. Members of the Government have also been active in saying fairness is at the heart of the budget. The bluster fell apart within minutes. This is by far the most regressive budget in some time. The spending cuts and tax increases will fall, directly and disproportionately, on the weaker and poorer sections of society. As every independent study has shown, after a period during which budgets were highly progressive, the Government has chosen to take exactly the opposite approach. Its single largest decision was to concentrate new taxes in a way that would have the biggest impact on poorer groups in society.

In what can only be described as a deeply cynical move, the documentation published yesterday did not provide any serious detailed assessment of the impact on various social groups of the announcements of both the Minister for Public Expenditure and Reform, Deputy Brendan Howlin, and the Minister for Finance, Deputy Michael Noonan. They could easily have shown the impact of all changes on the standard of living of households, but they chose not to. The welcome but minor change to the universal social charge was clearly intended as a distraction to hide the much deeper impact of the VAT increase on poorer households.

For many years the Minister for Social Protection, Deputy Joan Burton, and the Tánaiste spent budget night coming up with new ways of describing changes in social welfare as savage. They spoke at length about “the dirty dozen,”“the savage seven” and even “the treacherous 30.” When attacking a €7 increase in welfare payments in 2009, the Tánaiste described it as “the meanest possible increase,” and said that if the budget were the Titanic, it would be a case of “women and children last.” He also demanded higher fuel allowances.

The Labour Party Ministers for Social Protection and Public Expenditure and Reform negotiated together and came up with a set of cuts which are deeply mean-spirited and cruel. They go well beyond anything ever proposed by the party which the Minister of State, Deputy Ciarán Cannon, used to lead. The proposed cut to payments for young people with disabilities is callous and unnecessary.

To single out this group for such a cut says a lot about the priorities of those who made the decision. The targeting of young people with disabilities is another example of a broken promise, but it is much more than this. When asked during the general election debate what the number one social justice priority would be if he were elected to government, the leader of the Labour Party, now Tánaiste, said, “I think it would be looking after people with disabilities ... The first area that Labour in government would address in terms of equality and in terms of giving decent supports to people would be people with disabilities. I think, as a country, we have to make that the priority.” The leader of Fine Gael, now Taoiseach, followed quickly with the words, “That’s very laudable and I share that.” That is what the Taoiseach and the Tánaiste said to the people a short nine months ago, yet at the first opportunity to turn these words into action——

——they chose to cut massive amounts from young people with disabilities.

That is an extraordinarily negative signal to send to people with disabilities. The Government has also begun to shut the door on educational opportunities by cutting the third level disability fund by 20%. Why did the Government do that? Deputy Cowen raised that matter again this morning. It is an unfair and unnecessary cut. We had made great progress over the last decade in facilitating access to third level education for people with disabilities. We made transformative progress.


The Government should not have done it. The members of the Government are already too comfortable


These cuts will not be forgotten. They are cold, callous and calculating and all about votes and election politics.


That is what governed the decision-making in this budget and the Government was caught out in terms of the disability decision.

The budget is presented in disingenuous language, the language of camouflage and pretence.


The other welfare cuts were presented as incentivising work——



——and cutting undeserved payments.




The Taoiseach should stop using words. When he is cutting welfare he should not pretend it is about incentivising work, cutting undeserved payments, standardising payments or bringing people into line. That language drives people mad. They prefer plain speaking. The Government should say it as it is and stop pretending.

The Minister for Social Protection has given many extreme examples to justify her choice of cuts. If this agenda had been followed by any other party, Fine Gael and Labour Deputies would have been screaming blue murder in the House. In fact, they did so last year.

The end of lone parents payments will cause serious problems for many families if extra funding is not provided for training and child care for those affected. This is one of the sharpest cuts and has not, so far, got the attention it deserves. Again, it targets a vulnerable group. The restrictions for people with limited social insurance payments will be felt most by women.

Last year, Deputy Noonan enjoyed his joke about third children so much he repeated it four times during his speech. This year, he and his colleagues have implemented a bigger cut and have done everything possible to avoid talking about it.

The welfare measures in the budget are driven by the Labour Party’s desire to say that the biggest welfare payments are unchanged. As a result, the Government has adopted an approach of finding cuts that are deeply unfair and which carefully target smaller benefits on which vulnerable groups rely.

Every party was elected on a platform of giving education a clear priority in public spending. Previous plans showed specific measures to protect school staffing and supports for pupils with special needs. In April, Fianna Fáil put down a Private Members’ motion to this effect, which passed unanimously. Unfortunately, the details announced on Monday show a significant increase in the pupil/teacher ratio for primary and second level schools. It was camouflaged in language. As with everything else, these were cynically hidden in the middle of words claiming everything would be fine.

Cuts to smaller schools will directly impact on communities most dependent on them. The abolition of support for career guidance is a shocking decision. Its impact will be felt in all schools, but most of all in schools serving disadvantaged communities. It represents a cut of between 800 and 900 teachers and will mean a cut of two teachers in many large schools.


It is another con-job presented in the guise of the career guidance service, which is a clear dismantling and devastation of that service. In reality, it is a cut of 900 teaching posts from schools.


That is more of the nonsense. Does the Taoiseach know what he is talking about?


It means the posts will go from ex quota to in quota. It will be a case of last in, first out. Career guidance teachers will teach economics, history or geography. The Taoiseach should stop the pretence, be honest and say the Government is cutting teachers in second level schools. That is the impact on the ground.


To claim that these cuts can be absorbed in the general teaching schedule either shows a deep ignorance of how this vital service is provided or is another cynical pretence.


Every school needs career counselling. Every pupil should have the chance to speak confidentially with a trained person about his or her future.



He is pretending this is not even a cut. It cannot be done in a group setting or in an ad hoc way. It is at this age that young people face the most pressure and are most in need of someone to talk to. The Government is going back 30 and 40 years.


I have received texts from career guidance teachers saying the career guidance service is going back to the 1950s


Every school will feel the pressure, but schools in severely disadvantaged communities desperately need career counselling.


Their pupils depend on expert advice to help them make the critical move from school to higher education. It is not a joking matter. Ministers are displaying classic arrogance and cockiness. This is a serious issue that will impact on young people in our schools.


If we are talking about jobs and the economy, career guidance is an important link between school and the world of work and society.


The schools are not in a position to absorb this cut in their staffing or to fund it in some other way. The decision is deeply regressive and short-sighted and it should be reversed.

The issue that has served to expose the cynicism of the Government parties’ election campaigns more than any other is student charges. The solemn pledge not to increase them which the Tánaiste and Deputy Quinn signed, was part of a direct campaign to win student votes. Four days before polling day Deputy Quinn went to the gates of Trinity College and signed that pledge. He looked into the eyes of the students of USI and said Labour would deliver the pledge in Government. Deputies Quinn and Gilmore were fully aware of the State’s financial position when they made their pledge.

With this increase and the move to reduce student voting by holding elections on Thursdays, students are now fully aware of what the Labour Party really thinks of them. Of all the broken promises, that was one of the most cynical. It reinforces the sense among many young people about politics and their cynicism towards it. It damages politics for the younger generations to come.

Several weeks ago the Minister for Education and Skills briefed a newspaper about a plan to abolish grants for post-graduate students. That announcement was probably another exercise in manipulating expectations through the media, so that people would be relieved when the Minister abolished only the maintenance element of the grant. This decision was on no one’s agenda before the election. It will limit access to post-graduate studies for students from poorer families or will force them into extra part-time work which will undermine their studies. This runs against all strategies for increasing access, meeting skill needs and developing the knowledge economy.

This change also fits into a consistent pattern across Departments where rural areas will feel a disproportionate share of the burden. Rural schools are being targeted to lose hundreds of teachers. The extra charge for rural school transport, condemned last year by Fine Gael and Labour as an outrage, is not only being retained, it is being doubled. Rural students, who are those more likely to qualify for maintenance grants will have less access to post-graduate study. Rural Garda stations will close in higher numbers than elsewhere. The means testing and income criteria changes to farm assist will hit poorer families. Changes to REPS and the disadvantaged areas scheme will hit the most vulnerable farmers.

We welcome various changes announced yesterday which will help in the transfer of farms and we welcome the Government’s stated commitment to continue implementing our strategy for creating jobs in the agri-food sector. However, the accumulated impact of the changes announced this week makes very bad news for rural areas. In areas like south west Cork, where the Government controls 100% of Dáil representation, Government Deputies will have a difficult time explaining how their constituents will disproportionately feel the impact of cuts to schools, Garda stations and health facilities.

In the early stages of the general election campaign, Fine Gael spent much effort telling people with mortgage and rent pressures that a vote for them would bring thousands of euro in reliefs. Many people fell for those promises, and the measures announced yesterday come nowhere near meeting the urgent needs of a section of society facing enormous pressures. The Minister said he will soon get around to dealing with the Keane report on mortgage arrears. There is no need to wait. A Bill is on the Order Paper, and has passed Second Stage, which could be quickly adopted and begin to help these families. If the Taoiseach really believes in Dáil reform and in taking on board meaningful suggestions, Deputy Michael McGrath’s Debt Settlement and Mortgage Resolution Office Bill is worthy of implementation and should be taken on board. The Government is prevaricating too long on the Keane report itself.

The Minister’s announcement that there are now insuperable legal barriers to ending upward-only rent reviews is, again, a deep blow for many businesses who listened to Fine Gael and Labour promises for immediate abolition.


That advice was clear 12 months ago, before and after the election.

This commitment was not just ——


This commitment was not just in the Labour and Fine Gael manifestoes, it was also in the programme for Government, so certain was the Taoiseach that the law could be changed.


The law has not changed since the promise was made. Either the Taoiseach did not check whether it could be implemented or he made the promise regardless of advice. Retail Excellence Ireland has criticised what it described as “the scandalous Government U-turn”. It said “the Government has lied to every commercial tenant and retail employee in the country”. That is what Retail Excellence is saying about the Government.


That is a disgraceful way to treat an industry that has lost over 50,000 jobs in the past four years. As the Taoiseach has said many times in the Dáil, Fine Gael and the Labour Party do not really feel bound by their election manifestoes. No matter what commitments were made, be it on the back of a lorry in Roscommon or in front of Trinity College, they are not to be held to them.


Never before did parties have such detailed access to public finances before an election. In April, the Taoiseach tried to claim that things were much worse than expected, but he was undercut by the Minister for Finance, Deputy Noonan, when he said that the books were “better than on target”. This was confirmed again yesterday.


This week and for the past nine months, there has been a steady escalation in the amount of praise which the Government has lavished on itself. In this process we are getting to the stage where words such as “reform”’, “radical”’, “fairness”’ and “job creation” are being reduced to a level of Orwellian news speak.

In area after area, supposed “proof” of the Government’s effectiveness is based on manipulating baselines and brazen exaggeration. For example, 80% of the cuts in ministerial pay and 90% of the reduction in public service numbers being cited by the Government were in place before it took up office.


The Taoiseach is getting better. We have heard a series of speeches this week with claims that the Government had “negotiated” a €10 billion reduction in interest payments while the facts show that it was a pan-European deal which was over four times the size of what Ministers were actually negotiating for.

Tomorrow the Taoiseach will attend a European summit which will take decisions vital to the economic future of Ireland, Europe and perhaps even much of the world. Since the Dáil returned in early September, I have been asking the Taoiseach to outline his position on changes to the economic governance of Europe. Since much earlier, I have been pushing him on the issue of the flawed policies and damaging behaviour of the ECB. On the eve of this vital summit, he still refuses to outline a single proposal he has suggested. He will not circulate the proposals of other countries and he will not say what his negotiating position is, other than in the most banal generalities. The record shows that none of the taoisigh who have discussed major European reforms have ever taken such a dismissive approach to the Dáil and the Irish public. No matter how the Taoiseach is asked questions here, he will not even provide the information being briefed to journalists by his staff.

What is now deeply worrying is that the Taoiseach has signed up to the idea that the core problem for Europe is the need for stronger fiscal controls. This is the very agenda which has turned a challenging situation into a crisis which threatens the future of the euro.


This crisis was not caused by national governments breaking fiscal rules.



It has been caused by market concerns that the ECB might be willing to see a country fail to refinance its debts. The Taoiseach is so blinded by his partisan agenda in domestic politics that he cannot see the reality that is now accepted by most experts, that the Irish and Portuguese bailouts were required by a policy which has failed and which Europe is trying to find a way of abandoning.


Under the targets agreed before the bailout and supported now by both Government parties, Ireland’s debt is due to peak at a level below many countries that have no problem raising funds in the markets. The same applies for Portugal and other countries which are facing problems. Investors have fled the bond market because they believe that the ECB will not help countries to raise new finance. If this does not change at this week’s summit, whatever emerges will be another short-term fix which will fall apart and cause immense damage. Tighter fiscal rules are reasonable, but only if accompanied by a change in ECB policies, an EU fund large enough to help stimulate economies in need and tight, unified financial regulation. A control-only fiscal union would just entrench flaws which even Jacques Delors says were caused by politicians looking for the quick fix rather than the right solution. Every piece of major progress seen in Europe has come from solidarity and respect between nations. There has been precious little of either in recent months.

This is a time of unprecedented challenges, both here and throughout Europe. It is not a time for the short-term political manoeuvring. There are choices to be made and if we want to restore growth and jobs we need them to be the right choices. Unfortunately, both in this budget and in the agenda for the EU summit, the right words are being used to cover the wrong policies. The budget, which has been announced at great length and with much fanfare, is deeply unfair and will cost jobs. This was avoidable, but the Government chose to put winning a few headlines about income tax and welfare payments ahead of a fairer and job-supporting approach. The measures being implemented pose a direct threat to existing growth forecasts and to tax revenues, raising major concerns about whether the targets it sets out can be met. It is truly a missed opportunity in these difficult times for our nation.
