On this day 90 years ago, 6 December 1921, the Treaty was signed. The Treaty restored Ireland’s sovereignty which for so long had been lost. In the last days of the Treaty negotiations, the British conceded fiscal autonomy to Ireland. This, as Dick Mulcahy said, “Gave Ireland back her purse”.

I am afraid the Fianna Fáil-Green Party Government gave the purse away again this time last year as fiscal autonomy was conceded to the IMF and the European authorities. After a decade of disastrous decisions the building bubble burst and a Government which was riven with dissension could no longer find anyone to lend money to it, so it was forced to turn to the IMF and the European authorities to provide funding.

The people of Ireland have paid a very high price for this mismanagement of the economy. Personal wealth has been destroyed, thousands of people are sinking into poverty, emigration has returned and unemployment is far too high. The task of this Government is to regain control over Ireland’s fiscal and economic policies, to grow the economy again and to get people back to work. Those that have lost their jobs and young people who cannot get jobs have suffered most. The primary purpose of this budget is to support the creation of jobs in the short term, the medium term and the long term.

On 25 February 2011, the Irish people spoke and delivered a resounding mandate to Fine Gael and Labour. The mandate is to set the economy back on the road to recovery and to get people back to work. The new Government has made a strong start. We have restored political stability and have successfully renegotiated many of the conditions of the EU-IMF programme. We have restored Ireland’s reputation abroad, a reputation which was so severely damaged by the last Government. We have restored Ireland’s international credibility and all serious international commentators now believe that Ireland’s longer term position is sustainable and that with prudent management over the next four years we will get over our difficulties.

As a small country with an open economy, the crisis in the eurozone has a profound effect on our economic prospects. We are committed to playing a full part in resolving this crisis, so that the benefit of the common currency will continue for Ireland.

In spite of uncertainty, a gradual recovery has begun to take hold. Next year, the Department of Finance is forecasting an increase of 1.3% in the volume of GDP with around a 2.5% increase in nominal GDP, which is the primary driver for revenue growth. All forecasters agree that growth will be significantly stronger in 2013 and subsequent years. This growth is driven by the exporting sector, both international and indigenous.

Promoting International Trade

Much of Ireland’s growth at present can be attributed to the attractiveness of Ireland for inward investment. The corporate tax rate of 12.5% and our place in Europe are central to this. We made a commitment in the programme for Government to maintain the 12.5% rate and we will do so.

The Government has successfully protected this rate even under international pressure, given our fiscal state. The Government successfully negotiated a reduction of €10 billion in the interest rate margin that was far bigger than originally offered and the Taoiseach made no concession on the corporate tax rate in the course of those negotiations.

Today, I want to say to our friends in the multinational sector who continue to invest so strongly in Ireland and Europe, there will be no change in Ireland’s 12.5% corporate tax rate.

We promised this in the programme for Government and we will fulfil this commitment.

While the package of attractions for inward investment has been very successful, I believe with some adjustments more jobs can be created. As part of that strategy, I will introduce a special assignee relief programme. This will allow multinational and indigenous companies to attract key people to Ireland so as to create more jobs and to facilitate the development and expansion of businesses in Ireland.

After consultation with the Tánaiste, Deputy Eamon Gilmore, I am also introducing a foreign earnings deduction to further support our export drive by aiding companies seeking to expand into emerging markets. This targeted deduction will apply where an individual spends 60 days a year developing markets for Ireland in Brazil, Russia, India, China or South Africa, the so called, BRICS countries. I will be giving details of these and additional measures in the Finance Bill.

The international financial services industry in Ireland has been one of the great export success stories of the last 20 years. The sector employs more than 30,000 people and contributes over €1 billion in tax to the Exchequer. However, financial services are highly mobile and we must compete within a global market to ensure that the sector in Ireland continues to grow. Our commitment to the sector has been re-affirmed in the five year strategy for the industry which was launched by the Taoiseach in July this year. I intend to introduce a package of measures in the Finance Bill to support the continued success of the international funds industry, the corporate treasury sector, the international insurance industry and the aircraft leasing industry.

Indigenous Industry

Export growth from the multinational sector is not sufficient to drive the full economic recovery we are seeking. The domestic sector will be the real engine for job creation across the country. Already, indigenous companies in certain sectors are expanding and growing their operations. The Government will support and enhance their efforts through targeted measures for the SME sector.

In addition to the loan guarantee fund and micro-finance fund announced by the Minister for Jobs, Enterprise and Innovation, Deputy Richard Bruton, I am announcing that the first €100,000 of research and development expenditure of all companies will be allowed on a volume basis for the purpose of the research and development tax credit; the outsourcing arrangements for research and development purposes will be improved in a targeted manner to allow the greater of the existing percentage arrangement or €100,000; companies will have the option to use some portion of the research and development credit to reward key employees who have been involved in the development of research and development; the corporate tax exemption for new start-up companies is being extended for the next three years and will be available for companies that commence trading in 2012, 2013 and 2014; and as already announced, smaller companies will also be able to avail of the planned foreign earnings deduction where they plan to expand their export markets into the BRICS countries. I believe that these targeted measures will provide a stimulus for SMEs as they seek to develop, grow and expand their markets.

Deputies will also be aware that the employment and investment incentive is in operation since 25 November last. This incentive assists in raising risk capital for firms operating in more sectors of the economy than was previously allowed under the business expansion scheme. Other job creation measures will also be examined with a view to their inclusion in the Finance Bill.

Agrifood Industry

Active, energetic and profitable farming is fundamental to the agrifood sector. Irish food is now a world brand leader, and when milk quotas end in 2015 and as food prices are maintained or increased, we want Irish farmers to produce more to supply the emerging markets, where there is significant and growing demand for Irish food.

The food industry must be supported by efficient and progressive primary producers. I wish to encourage the transfer of farms to the next generation of farmers. Many young people from farming families were attracted off the land by the rewards of the building industry, but they are now returning to the family farm. The agricultural colleges are full and many young men and women now see their future in farming.

Later in my speech I will be announcing significant reductions in the rate of stamp duty on the transfer of commercial property. The new rate will also apply to farmland and the present relief for transfers to close relatives will continue to apply.

I am also modifying retirement relief from capital gains tax so that it better incentivises the timely transfers of farms and businesses before the current owners reach the age of 66. The approach is in keeping with the policy of my colleague the Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine, Deputy Simon Coveney, of encouraging timely transfer of farm assets and improving the age profile of farming. Full details of these measures will be in the Finance Bill.

There is a growing acceptance that greater use of the farm partnership model can not only help to increase scale, but can also help to develop the sector’s skill set through attracting more new entrants to the sector. To encourage farm partnership formation, I am introducing an enhanced 50% stock relief for all registered farm partnerships and a 100% stock relief for certain young trained farmers forming such partnerships. Subject to clearance with the European Commission under state aid rules, these reliefs will be made available until December 2015.

Tourism

The creation of a second reduced rate of VAT of 9% and halving the rate of employer’s PRSI on jobs with earnings up to €356 per week in the jobs initiative has boosted tourism and stimulated employment.The 9% rate of VAT will also apply to open farms which otherwise would be subject to a higher rate.

It is interesting to note, that the latest live register figures show that 125,000 people leftthe live register to take up employment this year up to the end of October. This shows how fluid the labour market is and also the difficulty with attempting to assign the creation of new jobs to specific initiatives. However, the tourism and hospitality industry believe that the jobs initiative has been very effective in generating additional business.

The Government was disappointed earlier this year when Aer Lingus and Ryanair were unwilling to provide additional flights to Ireland in exchange for the abolition of the air travel tax. This offer is still on the table and while the Government appreciates the contribution to the Irish economy being made by the main carriers, we want them to bring additional tourists into the country and we are prepared to negotiate a new mandate.

At the Global Irish Forum held in Dublin Castle earlier this year, it was announced that 2013 would be the year of the gathering, a year long programme of festivals, events and other gatherings designed to encourage the global Irish to visit Ireland in 2013 and to increase tourist numbers by 325,000. A special allocation will be made in the Revised Estimates Volume early in the New Year and it will be launched on St. Patrick’s Day.

All the measures I am announcing for the different sectors of the economy have one objective: to stimulate additional economic growth and to create additional jobs. As well as introducing policies to assist growth, we must also address the constraints on growth. The situation in the property sector at present represents a significant drag on growth throughout the country.

Restoring Property Transactions to More Normal Levels

When the development and construction bubble burst, the consequences were dire. A sector which amounted to around 20% of GDP has been reduced this year to around 5%. A massive hole was made in the Government finances through the loss of stamp duty, VAT, income tax, PRSI and capital gains tax. Even worse, the previous Government neglected the imploding construction sector, which has lost 164,000 jobs since the first half of 2007. We cannot restore all of these jobs and the industry will never go back to 20% of GDP. However, we can create the right conditions for construction employment to return to normal sustainable levels.

The absence of activity in the property market and the decline in house values are having a negative effect on the domestic economy. When the value of family homes is going down, even those with good incomes and without debt, tend to save rather than spend or invest, and consumer sentiment, albeit improving of late, will be affected by this.

All successful economies have a strong construction and development sector and a sustainable property sector. The Government has already announced a multiannual capital budget of €17 billion and I am now announcing the following measures to restore some confidence and to renew activity in the construction, development and property sectors.

The stamp duty rate for commercial property transfers will be reduced from the current top rate of 6% to a flat rate of 2% on all amounts from midnight tonight in respect of all non-residential property, including farmland as well as commercial and industrial buildings. Bringing down the cost of acquiring commercial property will have a positive effect on the property sector and indirectly on jobs in construction and related activities. The current stamp duty arrangements for residential property will continue to apply with 1% on transactions up to and including €1 million and 2% thereafter.

I am also introducing a capital gains tax incentive for property purchased between midnight tonight and the end of 2013. If a property is bought during this period and held for at least seven years, the gain attributable to that seven year holding period will be relieved from capital gains tax.

NAMA Rent Reviews

I am fully aware of the difficulties that upward only rent reviews are causing for some businesses. Despite exhaustive work in recent months by my colleague the Minister for Justice, Equality and Defence, Deputy Alan Shatter, including the preparation of draft legislation, it has not proved possible to develop a targeted scheme to tackle this issue that would not be vulnerable to legal challenge or require compensation to be paid to landlords. I do not believe the Opposition would want us to compensate landlords for any losses in their rent.

This is a matter of particular interest to NAMA which must deal with the problems caused by upward only rent reviews which apply to NAMA properties. NAMA advises me that it has a policy guidance for dealing with tenants’ difficulties arising from upward only rent reviews, which it has agreed to publish today. The NAMA policy guidance provides an opportunity for NAMA to approve rent reductions where it can be shown that rents are in excess of the current market levels and viability is threatened. The policy also provides for the appointment of an independent valuation of market rent where necessary. NAMA has also advised me that where a tenant is not getting satisfaction in negotiations with his NAMA landlord, he can contact NAMA directly and it assures us that any queries will be dealt with speedily. I welcome NAMA’s realistic approach to this difficult issue. Now that NAMA has acquired €74 billion worth of property, it can be seen this arrangement will have widespread implications.

Mortgage Interest Relief

The Government is committed to helping address the problems faced by those who bought homes at the height of the property boom, between 2004 and 2008. Therefore, I am going to fulfil the commitment in the programme for Government to increase the rate of mortgage interest relief to 30% for first time buyers who took out their first mortgage in that period.

I also confirm the decision made by my predecessor that mortgage interest relief will no longer be available to house purchasers who purchase after the end of 2012 and will be fully abolished from 2018. For those who wish to buy a home in 2012, I am providing today that: first time buyers will get mortgage interest relief at a rate of 25%, rather than the 15% proposed by the previous Government; and non-first time buyers will benefit from relief at 15% rather than the reduced rate of 10% proposed by the last Government. Any young couples listening to me who are thinking of buying a home will have increased mortgage interest relief if they purchase in 2012 ——

A Deputy:  Where are they going to get the money?

——but if they purchase in 2013, mortgage relief will end, arising from the decision of the previous Government.

Mortgage Arrears

Turning to those in mortgage difficulty, the Government is acutely aware of the increasing financial stress that some households are facing arising from difficulty in meeting their mortgage commitments. It was for this reason that the Government took the significant decision to establish a group to consider further necessary actions and to report within a very short time frame. The Government is now progressing with the implementation of the group’s recommendations as well as assessing other approaches as suggested by Deputies, Senators and by interest groups who made submissions. I expect to make a formal announcement on the next steps shortly.

Legacy Property Tax Reliefs

As part of this Government’s determination to develop a fairer tax code, legacy property reliefs must be reduced. My Department has undertaken an economic impact assessment of the measures proposed by the previous Government. It is quite clear that these proposals were unworkable and would have done significant and lasting damage to an already distressed property market, creating real difficulties for many ordinary people. This report is being finalised and will be published with the Finance Bill.

The report also highlights the vulnerability of small investors to insolvency if they lose these reliefs, a finding backed up by recent research from the Central Bank that shows high levels of negative equity and arrears in the buy-to-let mortgage sector. Therefore, I have decided not to proceed with the proposals put forward by the previous Government in last year’s budget. The report concludes that reliefs to small scale investors should not be restricted but that there is scope for larger investors to contribute more. The Government also believes that large scale investors in property that attracts tax reliefs can and should make more of a contribution. Therefore, in the interests of fairness, a property relief surcharge of 5% will be imposed on investors with an annual gross income more than €100,000. This will apply on the amount of income sheltered by property reliefs in a given year. Reliefs in section 23 type investments will not be terminated or otherwise restricted for investors with an annual gross income under €100,000 as these are at the greatest risk of insolvency.

Investors in accelerated capital allowance schemes will no longer be able to use any capital allowance beyond the tax life of the particular scheme where that tax life ends after 1 January 2015. Where the tax life of a scheme has ended before 1 January 2015, no carry forward of allowances into 2015 will be allowed. The delayed implementation of this measure gives individuals time to adjust. Full details will be in the Finance Bill.

Role of NAMA

As NAMA has completed its loan acquisition phase and is now concentrating fully on the active management of the assets under its care, the NAMA board, with my agreement, asked Michael Geoghegan, a former CEO of HSBC, to review NAMA and report his findings to me. His report was generally positive but arising from it, I am establishing an advisory group to advise me on NAMA’s strategy and its capacity to deliver on that strategy through property disposal and the ongoing management of assets. In making appointments to the NAMA board, the advisory group will help me identify candidates with entrepreneurial and property skills. Recommendations will also be provided by the group on strategies for NAMA to attract international capital to Ireland and to provide advice in respect of lessons to be learned from asset management agencies in other countries. I will issue a direction order to NAMA under section 14 of the National Asset Management Agency Act 2009 setting out the work of the advisory group and requiring NAMA to facilitate its operation.

Banking Sector

A strong and vibrant banking sector is vital to our recovery and to any growing economy. Credit is the lifeblood of the economy and without adequate credit availability, businesses will find it difficult to maintain the jobs they have, let alone create new jobs. Also, without sufficient credit, it will not be possible for the property market to stabilise.

Since taking office, the Government has completed a large scale restructuring of the banking sector, in which the two largest institutions will function as universal pillar banks. The more problematic institutions have been ring-fenced into a single entity. These restructured and recapitalised banks must now serve the different sectors of the economy. We have set the two pillar banks ambitious SME lending targets of €3 billion each this year, €3.5 billion each next year and €4 billion each in 2013. By making this credit available we are supporting increased activity in a key sector for job creation. The banks must also make mortgage credit available to allow people to avail of the mortgage interest relief incentives announced.

Public Finances

The medium-term fiscal statement set out the Government’s policies on budgetary reform and the path to sustainable public finances, both of which are essential for the creation of jobs. In the light of the revenue and expenditure figures for November and the other information that has come to hand, my Department now estimates that the general Government deficit for this year will be 10.1% of GDP. This is lower than the 10.6% required by the EU-IMF programme. The general Government deficit target for 2012 is 8.6% of GDP. No matter what happens in the wider eurozone, Ireland needs to restore sustainability to its public finances. If the eurozone crisis recedes, we will be among the best placed to grow quickly, as evidenced by the European Commission’s growth forecasts. If the eurozone crisis persists, it is equally important for the State to reduce its dependence on borrowing.

To continue to improve the sustainability of the public finances, we need €3.8 billion of additional fiscal consolidation in 2012. The Minister for Public Expenditure and Reform, Deputy Brendan Howlin, set out the €750 million capital expenditure consolidation on 10 November and yesterday set out how the €1.45 billion current expenditure consolidation would be implemented. In regard to the €1.6 billion revenue consolidation required in 2012, the full year effect of measures already introduced is €600 million, which means that I am announcing additional new tax measures today worth €1 billion approximately.

Taxation

The programme for Government states there will be no increase in income tax.

All the poor people down my way pay tax. I do not know what country the Deputy is living in if he thinks the low paid do not pay income tax.

That is the key issue for this budget. I want to make it clear that there will be no increase in income tax in this budget. In case there is any doubt, there will be no increases in rates, no narrowing of bands and no reductions in personal tax credits. Wages and salaries in January will be no lower than in December; therefore, people will continue to have discretion on how they spend their income.

If one looks at the supporting documents and at the tables of income for different families and people in different family situations, one will find that we have achieved a first. If one looks across different families and partnerships, one will see the income from their wages and salaries will be exactly the same. I do not think that has ever happened before in a budget.

The Government has very carefully considered the options open to it. We must find €1 billion and there are options. There are five main sources of taxes — corporation tax, income tax, VAT, excise and capital taxes. Everybody knows that under the EU-IMF programme, expenditure has to decrease and taxes have to increase. Direct taxes such as income tax and PRSI have abiggerimpact on jobs than indirect taxes. If one taxes something, one usually gets less of it and income tax and PRSI are taxes on jobs. Indirect taxes have a lower impact on economic growth and jobs. That is why the bulk of the adjustments being made in this budget will be through increases in VAT and capital taxes.

The Opposition has already criticised this approach, but it should make clear in its replies to the budget what its alternatives are. Is it suggesting income tax should be increased or that we should welch on our commitment that the 12.5% corporation tax rate is sacrosanct?

If it is, it should test it out on the people in the next election, but we fundamentally disagree with that approach.

The majority of revenue adjustments to date have been achieved through increases in direct taxation. The marginal rate of taxation on income is now 52% for PAYE workers and 55% for the self-employed. The OECD has concluded that Ireland has the most progressive tax system of the EU members of its organisation and revenue records show that the top 5% of income earners pay 44% of income tax. When the marginal rates of tax are very high, jobs are lost. Indirect taxes have a less adverse impact on employment. That is why in this budget indirect taxes rather than taxes on income are being increased. That does not mean that the wealthy should not carry the principal burden of tax. The minimum effective tax restriction on high earners is designed to ensure this by imposing a minimum effective income tax rate of 30% for those subject to the full restriction. In addition, they are obliged to pay 4% in PRSI and up to 10% in the universal social charge, bringing the minimum effective rate to 44%. This is a major and entirely justifiable change from the situation that prevailed a short number of years ago when a small number of them paid no income tax at all. Reports from the Revenue Commissioners indicate that the restriction is working. I will keep this restriction under review and may return to the topic in budget 2013, depending on the conclusions of a forthcoming Revenue report.

Universal Social Charge

I refer to another fairness measure we are introducing today. When the Government was planning this budget, it decided that it had to create jobs but that it had to be fair. It has two primary objectives. As a fairness measure, we have reviewed the impact of the universal social charge and I am pleased to announce that today I am proposing changes to the charge that will help the low-paid, part-time and seasonal workers in labour intensive areas such as the hospitality sector and farming. From 1 January 2012, the exemption level will be raised from €4,004 to €10,036.

In case the figures have been lost in the noise, the change means that 330,000 people will no longer be liable to pay the universal social charge.

The Revenue Commissioners will collect the universal social charge on a cumulative basis next year, thereby reducing the risks of over or underpayment of the charge. This will offset the costs of the very positive change made for the lower paid.

VAT

The previous Government agreed with the IMF and the European authorities to increase VAT by 2% — 1% in 2013 and 1% in 2014. In the interests of giving certainty, we are bringing these increases forward to 2012. During the lifetime of the Government we will not increase the standard rate of VAT beyond the 23% being announced today. That is another commitment in the programme for Government we intend to fulfil.

Other European countries have tended to place the burden of fiscal correction on indirect taxes rather than income tax. At this point, 20 of the 27 EU member states have increased VAT in the past four years and further increases are being considered by several member states. It should be borne in mind when people debate this sensitive issue that most food, children clothes, oral medicines and other goods and services will remain at the zero VAT rate.

The 9% rate introduced in the jobs initiative for certain services and the 13.5% rate that applies to home heating oil, residential housing, general repairs and maintenance works will remain the same. When the Opposition is scaremongering the elderly about not being able to fill the oil tank for central heating, it would want to remember that the rate of VAT which applies to central heating fuel is 13.5%, not 21% as certain Deputies opposite have claimed.

For the majority of the past 20 years the VAT differential between the Republic and Northern Ireland has been 3.5% and it was as high as 6.5% as recently as 2009. After the increase I am announcing, the differential will not be 3.5%, it will be 3%. On this basis, I do not expect any increase in cross-Border shopping as a result of the VAT increase.

Some opponents of the VAT change — experts in mental arithmetic — claim that the increase will cost households €500 per annum on average. I am informed that this calculation is incorrect, as they have not taken into account the fact that business contributes significantly——

—— to the estimated VAT yield.

Ensuring a Fair Distribution of the Tax Burden

The programme for Government is committed to ensuring people with wealth pay their fair share.

I am introducing a number of measures that will meet that objective. I am increasing the current rate of capital acquisitions tax from 25% to 30%; increasing capital gains tax from 25% to 30%; reducing the group A tax free threshold for capital acquisitions tax from €332,084 to €250,000; increasing DIRT from 27% to 30%, as we do not need to incentivise savings when the savings ratio has reached a phenomenal 14%; broadening the base for PRSI through the removal of the remaining 50% employer PRSI relief on employee pensions, therein following the example of the Government last year, which removed the first tranche; and further broadening the base for PRSI to cover rental, investment and other forms of income. I will introduce this measure, but it will not become effective until 2013, as we need some time to prepare. We are also increasing the rate of notional distribution on the highest value approved retirement funds, ARFs, and similar products to 6%. When the pension levy was introduced, many Members of the Opposition argued that this should have been done. It will be introduced via the finance Bill. We are increasing the rate of tax on the transfer of an ARF on someone’s death to a child over 21 years from 20% to 30%, which is intended to bring all capital taxes into line at the 30% rate.

I am abolishing the citizenship condition for payment of the domicile levy so as to ensure tax exiles cannot avoid it by renouncing their citizenship. I intend to keep the contentious issue of the tax treatment of tax exiles under constant review.

As a consequence of these measures, the rate of tax applying to capital, interest and earnings, through the high earners’ restriction, will all be aligned at 30%.

Carbon Tax

I propose to increase the carbon tax on fossil fuels introduced in budget 2010 from the equivalent of €15 per tonne to €20 per tonne. The increase will be applied to petrol and auto diesel from midnight. However, in view of the impact this increase will have on home heating costs during the winter months, the increase on other fuels will not take effect until May 2012. This increase is half of that proposed in the previous Government’s four year plan for budget 2012. Since I am not going to apply the carbon tax to solid fuels, there will be no increases in the case of peat or coal, be it a bale of briquettes, a bag of blocks, etc.

Consistent with our promise in the programme for Government, I am allowing farmers a double income tax deduction for increased costs arising from the change in carbon tax. Farmers will also be significant beneficiaries of the reduction in the universal social charge.

A measure that will benefit businesses is a reduction in the VAT rate on district heating from 21% to 13.5%. This will bring district heating into line with the majority of heating supplies. I am also amending the VAT refund order for farm construction to provide that farmers may claim a refund on wind turbines purchased from 1 January 2012.

Pensions

Owing to the changes in pension tax relief adopted in last year’s budget and the Finance Act 2011 and the pension fund levy required to fund the jobs initiative, the pensions sector will make a sizeable contribution of approximately €750 million to the Exchequer in 2012. Although the EU-IMF programme commits us to move to standard rate relief on pension contributions, I do not propose to do this or make changes to the existing marginal rate relief at this time. However, the incentive regime for supplementary pension provision will need to be reformed to make the system sustainable and more equitable in the long term. My Department and the Revenue Commissioners will work with the various stakeholders during the next year to develop a workable solution. This will include consultation on whether and to what degree pension funds might invest more in Ireland than abroad, as advocated by one of our leading trade unions.

Household Charge and Motor Tax

The household charge of €100 per dwelling has already been announced by the Minister for the Environment, Community and Local Government, Deputy Phil Hogan.

To protect vulnerable groups in society, it is proposed to provide a waiver for those on mortgage interest supplement and those residing in certain categories of unfinished housing estates.

Provision will also be made to allow payment of the charge in instalments.


There have been significant reductions in revenues from VRT and motor tax as a result of, among other factors, the consumer movement towards buying cleaner and cheaper cars. I am initiating a consultation process with the motor industry and other interested parties to commence in early 2012 to review options for the improvement in VRT and motor tax revenues in future years. In the meantime, however, the Minister will make provision for an increase in motor tax effective from 1 January 2012. This will generate additional income of some €47 million in 2012 to be used for Exchequer deficit reduction purposes.

The details are in the documents accompanying the budget.

Export Refund Scheme

I propose to have my Department engage in a consultation process with the motor industry with a view to putting in place an export refund scheme that would allow for a refund of VRT contained in a vehicle on the permanent export of the vehicle to another member state. This would restore a balance to the sector in the context of the number of imported cars. This would also be beneficial to the Exchequer and the environment through the displacement of used cars with new or less polluting cars.

Absenteeism

Absenteeism is a problem in the public and private sectors. One provision in the tax code may incentivise workers to absent themselves from work — where the employer makes up the balance of their pay, they may have more take home pay than if they were at work.

Therefore, I am removing the existing tax exemption for the first 36 days of illness benefit and occupational injury benefit in order that this incentive to absenteeism is removed. The Minister for Social Protection, Deputy Joan Burton, will in 2012 introduce proposals to deal with absenteeism in the public and private sectors. She will engage in discussions with all interested parties and invite submissions from the public with a view to introducing a range of proposals.


Excise duty on a packet of 20 cigarettes is being increased by 25 cent from midnight. This increase will be applied to other tobacco products on a pro rata basis at the same time.

While the VAT increase will apply to alcohol, I am not increasing excise on alcohol. There has been much discussion on the issue of low cost alcohol products being sold in off-licences, particularly supermarkets. I am aware of the social and health consequences of the availability of very cheap alcohol leading to the abuse of alcohol, particularly by young people. The Minister of State at the Department of Health, Deputy Róisín Shortall, has developed a paper on the causes and consequences of alcohol abuse and in early 2012 will legislate to deal with the issues identified, including the low cost of alcohol sold in off-licences and supermarkets.

The next provision is one for the non-puritan Members of the Opposition. I will introduce legislation to facilitate the extension of betting duty on remote betting and the introduction of betting intermediaries duty——


——to cover betting exchanges.

Conclusion

The core message of this Government is to get Ireland working again. It is the unifying goal of the new Fine Gael-Labour coalition Government. Last year, I said that the then Government had learned nothing and forgotten nothing. Twice in a generation, reckless spending on the back of irresponsible politics has landed our country in a fiscal crisis.

In my time in politics, I have experienced many economic downturns. In previous recessions the policy position was to get the country back to where it was before the recession began. There is no point in following that approach now. If we go back to where we were before it all began we will be back in the bubble economy when Ministers held a naïve belief that all of us could become wealthy by selling property to each other——

——and in their hubris, the captains and kings of the development industry advised citizens of other countries on easy ways to get rich. If we need a role model it should be the economy of the mid to late 1990s where over 600,000 jobs were created and growth was based on competitiveness, high educational standards, a credit flow from the banks to enterprise and hard work.


This Government will not repeat the mistakes of the past. We are changing the way politics works to make it more transparent, more accountable and designed to secure the best outcome for the Irish people.

We are implementing our programme for Government commitments to improve the terms of the EU-IMF programme. This is a work in progress but our results to date include a reduction in the penal interest rate margin on the bailout package, which is worth a reduction of €10 billion in the burden of debt; the creation of jobs through the introduction of the jobs initiative——


——a refocus on fairness through the restoration of the cut in the national minimum wage; and an additional year to bring the deficit below 3% of GDP.


The budget changes the economic strategy of the previous Government to put a much greater focus on growth and employment. It balances the need to restore confidence in Ireland’s fiscal position with the key objective of supporting economic growth that delivers jobs.

In conclusion, I would like to associate myself with the comments made by my colleague the Minister for Public Expenditure and Reform, Deputy Brendan Howlin, yesterday about the late Brian Lenihan. Brian Lenihan had, as Minister for Finance, a most difficult task, which he fulfilled with great courage and dignity. Go ndéanfaidh Dia trócaire ar a anam. I commend this budget to the House.
