Budget 2008 gives a zero gain for low income earners. These are not my words but the words of CORI through the mouth of Fr. Sean Healy. I hold in my hand the document that he presented to us today.

It is no wonder the Taoiseach realised that he would at least have to postpone his own income increase of €700 per week when a couple earning €15,000 each or €30,000 per year must look elsewhere to fund the increased prices of oil, food and the essentials of life. They did not get a 1 cent increase in this budget.

Certainly, benchmarking or independent groups such as those who justified the Taoiseach’s €38,000 reward are not interested in the 30% of people finding it difficult to make ends meet. Recently, a person from the Society of St. Vincent de Paul advised that this year, coming towards Christmas, their clients were not looking for special toys but for the bare essentials of life such as food.

It is hard to believe, after 15 years of constant growth, that we still find so many people in such dire need, especially children. I welcome the fact the Government has agreed to previous commitments on social housing, so that 9,000 houses will start or be bought in 2008. This will also benefit the building trade, where many houses are now unsaleable. It is vital that local authorities are not used as the relieving officers for hard-pressed builders, but that they get genuine value for money.

Motorists have once again taken a hit from this Fianna Fáil Government. Many will have forgotten by now that it was Fianna Fáil that did away with car tax, along with rates on houses, in 1977, solely to get elected. This led to the serious debt [758]problems that brought our country close to bankruptcy. The 10% increase in car tax has nothing to do with the green agenda, but is just another stealth tax by the Government.

It is only a few months since the Government promised a reduction in taxes, increased numbers of teachers, nurses, gardaí and whatever else was wanted.

Now all these promises have gone by the wayside and instead of a €2 billion surplus, we are now heading towards a €5 billion debt, just to meet increased wages, social welfare etc.

I welcome the increase in social welfare and, hopefully, I will get an opportunity to speak on that matter in another debate. It is vital that the Minister for Finance, Deputy Cowen, not only speaks of rectifying mismanagement at every level within the Government, such as the HSE, but that he delivers on his proposals.

Over the past ten years we have had massive increases in public service employment, yet we have less frontline staff in many areas. I was advised only this week that the Department of the Environment, Heritage and Local Government cannot deal with applications for water and sewerage schemes because it has not got sufficient quality personnel to examine the projects. If any farmer gave the same excuse with regard to pollution control, he would soon be out of business. In my constituency dental services are being removed from the town of Cootehill because in spite of all the staff within the HSE at management and other levels there are insufficient dentists.

The HSE received agreement from Government to train speech therapists and physiotherapists, but now that these people are qualified, they cannot get jobs from the HSE because they have not got work experience. Many patients are, as a result, left without a service. This is just another example of lack of management or joined-up thinking.

The budget had very little to offer to the farming community. At the time the Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, Deputy Mary Coughlan, announced the special grants scheme for waste management to help farmers deal with the nitrates directive, I received assurance from her — its on the record of the Dáil — that the Government had no problem with funding for that scheme. However, the Minister for Finance made a big deal of the fact that he has increased her budget by €35 million towards that end, with no guarantee for full payment. No funding has been provided for the restoration of the farm development scheme, which was supposed to last [759]seven years, but was suspended after four months. Many young farmers in the process of taking over holdings were badly caught by this and may no longer be able to commit themselves to full-time farming.

I acknowledge, as Deputy Johnny Brady mentioned, there have been some improvements in the tax regime as far as partnerships are concerned. The situation was ridiculous. If a partnership broke up as a result of sickness, death or a fall-out of some sort, the tax implications were appalling.

Mushroom production was an extremely important family farm project ten years ago, with almost 600 people involved. However, there are now only approximately 80 units in full-time production. It is clear from answers I received from the Minister regarding other farm production that she has no idea how many are actually involved. I will return to this issue on another occasion. Young farmers need all the support they can get to stay in business, but it is clear the Government has lost interest. It is strange that at a time when we are threatened with foot and mouth disease, or any such problem, agriculture becomes extremely important, but at budget time it is another story.

I want to address the important issue of our road network. I am delighted we have a reasonable road from Dublin to Monaghan, with the third bypass finished recently. I am concerned, however, by the Minister’s statement in the budget with regard to his commitment to the Dublin area and projects currently under construction, as he makes no commitment to the Border region whatsoever. The road from Monaghan town to Emyvale and on to the Border is extremely poor and is now a bottleneck——

We need to be sure of the direction we are taking. The last letter I received from the NRA gave no commitment to even making improvements to that road. It said that under the Good Friday Agreement, it was looking at a dualcarriageway from Derry to Dublin, but that will take some time. I plead for moneys to be made available for the project and with Deputy Blaney and others who use that road when travelling from Donegal to back me on the desperate need for improvements on the road before we have a serious accident. In the context of accidents, major question marks must be raised with regard to the way funding was made available under the DBO structure for the Castleblaney bypass, with which there are major difficulties.

Another equally important cross-Border road is the N3 which passes through Cavan, but there has been little progress on the Belturbet bypass. [760] This bypass has been in the pipeline for many years, but I have been told by Cavan County Council personnel that while it is fully sanctioned as far as the legal end is concerned, there is no money available for it. I have no doubt some millions will be made available this year from the NRA towards the purchase of land, but we need to see real progress on the construction of that road. If the peace dividend is to mean anything to those in the Border region, we must have proper road structures put in place immediately.

When a former Taoiseach, Albert Reynolds, announced the ceasefire, I walked across the floor to him when the House closed to welcome it and suggested that he should at least provide some moneys for the reopening of the Border roads. He did that some weeks later. I make the same suggestion to the Government now. Roads such as the N2 and N3 may not be major thoroughfares in the eyes of the Government, but they are extremely important cross-Border projects that need funding.
