I welcome the opportunity to respond to the Tánaiste and Minister for Finance in this budget debate. I intend to expose the hypocrisy of the pre-election promises made by this and other Governments on tax cutting which grossly misled voters on the state of the finances and the management, or mismanagement, of the economy. I will also give examples of how things could and should be done differently.

144

Since the summer, the Tánaiste has been beavering away to condition the public for a tight budget. He has been strenuously trying to dampen expectations created by his own party’s unrealisable pre-election promises. In advance of the election, Fianna Fáil promised 2,000 additional gardaí, 4,000 teachers, 1,500 hospital beds, 2,000 consultants, tax and PRSI cuts, affordable housing and much more. The deceit on which the election was won was clear for all to see when tax cutting proposals which were never viable had to be abandoned in the face of a €1.75 billion shortfall in tax revenues. Despite the fact that the economy is still relatively strong, the Tánaiste has done such a good job of lowering expectations that people expected nothing from this budget. It suited him to keep expectations low and to foster fears of a harsh budget because [144] it allowed him to present the budget he has delivered as being better than expected.

How should we judge this budget? People will ask whether it lifts them out of poverty and deprivation, ensures a more equal distribution of the benefits of prosperity, puts the economy back on a more stable competitive footing, delivers an improvement in quality and capacity within our creaking public services, reduces the financial pressures on hard pressed families or delivers value for money for taxpayers. These are the question that people across the State will be asking as they examine the details of what has been delivered. In many senses, however, it is too early to judge this budget because we have not yet seen the fine print. We will have to examine its contents, as well as the measures that will be announced by Departments, in the hours ahead. There is a very real concern it contains hidden cuts in public services which will not become apparent until Departments start to allocate their own budgets. I recall the HSE cuts which affected patient care despite the Minister for Health and Children’s assurances to the contrary.

Last week, Sinn Féin set out our priorities for maintaining healthy public finances, building the economy and investing in health, education, housing and child care. We also proposed measures to help people return to the workforce. As finances become tighter, we realise it is not possible to deliver the levels of improvement in capacity and quality in public service we want in one or two budgets but the priorities have to be right. Front line services in primary and preventative health care, school buildings and class sizes, pre-school education and child care infrastructure should have been delivered in this budget if the Tánaiste wanted a positive appraisal. Scandalously, no mention was made of improving child care infrastructure or of pre-school education.

This budget will be disappointing for ordinary workers struggling on low and medium incomes and people seeking an improvement in public services such as health and education. There will be widespread disappointment at the failure to increase the medical card threshold, which is set at a mere €184. It is telling that the standard social welfare payment of €185.80 is higher than the medical card threshold. The allocation to the National Treatment Purchase Fund, which is symbolic of the Government’s support for private health care, is increased to €100 million despite being of little benefit to most people requiring hospital care. That money should go to the public sector rather than bolstering the private sector.

145

This is a minimalist budget. I acknowledge that increases are being made to social welfare but these are too low to keep families faced with sharp increases in the cost of living out of poverty. While the gains from widening of the standard rate tax band are welcome, they will be lost again when stealth charges are inevitably imposed by cash strapped local authorities across [145] the State in the form of increased service charges and management charges for residents resulting from the failure by local authorities to take charge of estates.

The announcements on social housing are not adequate to ensure the end of social housing waiting lists any time soon. Doing more in this area would have had the additional benefit of boosting the declining construction sector and helping the 43,600 unfortunate families who have languished on the social housing list for lengthy periods of time.

Where are the long overdue steps towards the creation of a State pre-school system? The measures on child care do not go nearly far enough to assist families who are unable to cope with child care costs equivalent to a second mortgage. The additional €100 per year in the early child care supplement will do little for these people.

The Tánaiste stated that the economic prospects for farming have improved, with increasing producer prices and food exports, but there was no acceptance by him that farm incomes are falling or stabilised at a very low base. Many small farmers, particularly beef and suckler farmers, are surviving on unsustainably low incomes.

Sinn Féin was the only party that argued in the run-up to the election that the Government, in light of the slowdown in economic growth, could not afford to cut taxes and maintain, let alone improve, public services and provide essential infrastructure. It was the only party to oppose proposals from the Government parties and others to introduce tax cuts on the ground that such cuts were not viable. There is now widespread acceptance that this is the case, as the 2008 Estimates of receipts and expenditure have proven.

No one doubts that presenting a budget in the current economic circumstances is more challenging than in previous years. As an open economy, Ireland is affected by international developments, including rising oil prices, the declining value of the dollar and international credit crunch. At home, we are experiencing a slowdown in the construction and property sectors, on which the economy has become excessively dependent, and face increased competition from low wage economies in the accession states, Middle East and Far East. Ireland, as a whole, continues to suffer from significant infrastructure deficits and lags behind other states in terms of research and development capacity within enterprise, while the level of engagement in upskilling and retraining by workers remains too low. All these factors act as a wake up call, a reminder that we need to take action to put the economy back on a solid foundation and ensure we regain competitiveness.

146

The current account has a surplus of more than €7 billion. The State is also in a strong position in terms of the debt to GDP ratio to borrow for [146] capital projects. More could have been done to improve public services. Projected growth for the coming years, while lower than previous predictions, remains healthy by international standards. The Minister forecast GDP growth of 3%, which is a difficult but achievable target. The problem is not the percentage of growth — GDP growth of 3% is respectable — but that the Government planned its expenditure programme, as outlined in the programme for Government, on the basis of an over-optimistic assessment of growth. This projection was not based on a realistic assessment of future economic developments given that a perceptible change had been under way in the economy for the past five years. It had become flabby and had started to rely on construction and consumption, rather than the exports which had been central to economic performance in the early days of the Celtic tiger.

The slowdown in the construction and property sectors has, predictably, had a substantial impact on tax receipts. Although the Department’s tax strategy papers identified this possibility as likely in advance of budget 2007, the Government refused to accept this view and proceeded to make foolhardy proposals to cut tax. We now have the farcical position of the Minister for Finance trying to rewrite history and cover up the reality of the approach the Government took. This will not work.

Delivering a speech as part of the Indecon public policy lecture series recently, the Minister for Finance stated: “In managing our public finances we have not in the past and we will not in the future plan the public finances around the assumption that tax receipts from the property and wider construction sector will continue to grow in future years as they have done in the recent past.” The course of action the Minister proposed to avoid is precisely the one the Government chose. The shortfall of €1.75 billion is a glaring reminder that it planned public finances around the assumption that tax receipts from property and construction would continue, despite clear signs of a slowdown in this sector.

We now face crucial decisions on the direction the State must take. My party will hold the Government to account to ensure decisions to raise or reduce overall taxation revenue are made on the basis of what is needed to meet social goals and other spending demands. For more than ten years the Government has pursued a policy of low levels of personal taxation and public service provision, with a growing reliance on stealth taxes. Changes in the tax base in the past decade have involved cuts in income taxes which have benefited the better off and increases in indirect taxes which disproportionately impact those on low incomes.

147

While the Minister has announced a number of positive taxation measures as part of the budget, these initiatives maintain the status quo and do not constitute a move towards a fairer or more [147] progressive taxation system. Why has he again failed to strengthen the limit on the use of tax reliefs by certain high income individuals introduced as part of the 2006 Finance Act? This should have been done to ensure tax reliefs are not exploited by some high income individuals to reduce their tax bill to the point at which they pay less tax than ordinary workers. This is a ludicrous position which should have been prevented.

While Sinn Féin welcomes the Minister’s decision to increase tax credits to keep those on the minimum wage out of the tax net, we remain concerned that the minimum wage is not meeting the benchmark of 60% of the average industrial wage. I welcome the increase in the standard rate income tax band. My party strongly argued that those on or below the average industrial wage must be kept within this band.

I also welcome the Minister’s sensible decision not to proceed with the cut of 1% in the top rate of income tax which his party proposed in advance of the general election. This measure would have cost the Exchequer €280.4 million and benefited those on higher incomes most, as was the case with the reduction in the top rate from 42% to 41% in last year’s budget. Reducing the standard rate tax band by 2% would have cost the Exchequer €1.13 billion, revenue that is clearly needed to fund our public services.

In the run-up to the budget, Sinn Féin argued that maintaining healthy public finances had to underpin the Government’s approach to budget 2008. If public finances are not kept in a healthy state, the Government cannot ensure that everyone’s basic rights to housing, health and education are met, nor can it deliver infrastructure to ensure our cities, towns, villages and businesses are served by modern transport and telecommunications infrastructure and everyone has the benefit of a comprehensive regime of social protection.

While Sinn Féin welcomes the changes in vehicle registration tax, we question the reason this step was not taken when it was signalled last year. Why did the Minister believe it necessary to give people a year to purchase their high emitting vehicles without having to face any consequences? Why will this measure not come into effect until July when most other measures will take effect almost immediately?

Sinn Féin also welcomes the increases in mortgage interest relief. Many of those who bought their homes in recent years are being pushed to the limit as a consequence of increases in mortgage interest — I believe there were nine in all — introduced in the past year.

148

As I indicated, the tax measures announced today do not contain anything radical. We can only urge that the proposed commission on taxation be set the task of determining the best way to fundamentally restructure to tax system to create a progressive, redistributive tax system [148] through which revenue is raised in a fair, transparent and accountable manner in order that Government has the revenue needed to reduce inequalities, improve public services and deliver infrastructure. The commission must also address the recent explosion in stealth taxes and charges.

I will address a related matter which remains largely ignored by Government, namely, the expansion of low paid employment, a development which has serious long-term consequences for the tax take, both in terms of income tax revenue and revenue from spending taxes. Although figures for employment growth for 2007 show a net increase of 78,400 new jobs for the 12 months to the end of June, there was no commensurate growth in income tax receipts because the vast majority of the new jobs were low paid.

Government priorities must also include ensuring that attempts by any employer to depress wages in key sectors of the economy through the exploitation of migrant workers are prevented. The use of agency workers to drive down pay and conditions can be stopped through the introduction of new legislation. I and other Deputies have called for the introduction of such legislation on many occasions.

As we speak, the Minister of State with responsibility for labour affairs, Deputy Billy Kelleher, is plotting with his British counterpart to block an EU directive that would give 30,000 temporary workers the right to the same pay and conditions as full-time staff. This is a disgrace. Nothing in the budget, in terms of adjustments to tax credits and bands, will compensate for the loss of earnings people across the State will experience if the downward pressure on pay and conditions arising from the failure to regulate for equal rights for agency workers is not addressed.

The Minister’s increases in social welfare, particularly with regard to pensions, carers and lone parents are welcome, but in the main do not go far enough to tackle poverty in the State. The increases in the main payments may be in line with inflation but given the low rate of existing payments they will not go far towards improving the life of somebody reliant on welfare.

The universal nature of child benefit and the early child care supplement means the minimal increases have the least effect where needed, nor do the increases offer anything substantially different or innovative in terms of encouraging people out of welfare and into work. This was the main social welfare priority for my party in our budget proposals. We recognise the large sector of people in receipt of welfare who would rather contribute to the economy but are caught in welfare traps and poverty.

149

We called for the medical card scheme to be extended to five years for people returning to work, for family income supplement payments to be increased substantially and automatically flagged and wage disregard thresholds to be [149] raised. Once again the Minister has failed to use the opportunity presented to him to achieve something of note. Instead we are left, as usual, with a piecemeal approach to welfare, with incremental, paltry increases that, weeks into the new year, will be of limited benefit.

We welcome the fact that the proposals to cut PRSI contributions have not been announced as part of this budget. We all want to see the burden of taxes and PRSI on ordinary workers reduced, but it can only happen if it is visible and viable. This is not the case if the cuts will undermine the capacity of the social insurance fund to meet social protections, such as redundancy payments, maternity benefit and social welfare. This was demonstrated by the latest actuarial review of the social insurance fund which predicted that the fund’s surplus is projected to be exhausted by 2016 on the basis of the central economic assumptions and benefits indexed in line with earnings. The proposed 2% cut in the employee PRSI rate would have cost €720 million in a full year, while the 1% cut in the self-employed PRSI rate would have cost €220 million in a full year.

A key priority for Sinn Féin is increased quality and capacity within public services. This must involve getting better value for money in public spending. To do that, Ministers and their Departments will have to demonstrate better management of their respective briefs. The wasteful over-use of consultants will have to be abandoned, or, at least, significantly reduced.

Promises to improve the health service are in tatters as the unworkable mess that is the HSE fails more and more of our citizens, most notably in recent times the women affected by the breast screening scandal. Undertakings made before the election to address the crisis in primary education mean little to parents whose children cannot access a place in primary schools. The key question against which this budget has to be assessed is whether it provides the revenue needed to address the deficits in key public services. Has the Minister for Finance, Deputy Cowen, provided what is needed to increase quality and capacity in public services?

The population of the State has grown considerably in recent years from just over 3.6 million in 1996 to 4.2 million in 2006. In some areas, such as the greater Dublin area and the commuter belt, the population growth has been dramatic. Quite simply, public services have not been adequately expanded to meet this demand and the pressure is being felt in schools and in hospitals in particular. Public transport is full to capacity in urban centres, while rural areas lack any proper public transport infrastructure. If one walks down this city this evening, one can hardly walk past the bus stops because there are dozens of people queuing to board grossly overcrowded buses. The public is willing to use public transport if it is provided but, unfortunately, it is not.

150

[150] Social housing output has not been sufficient to meet demands and there are still approximately 43,600 families on social housing waiting lists. Other essential services, including the fire service, remain under resourced. I have a communication from a colleague in Donegal who told me that a constituent of his has been on the housing waiting list for 15 years. She was pregnant when she signed on to the housing waiting list. She has again been promised a house next year. There is a reasonable expectation that she may eventually be housed next year. When her child, probably over a year later, is attending college that will be 16 or 17 years without a proper home.

Shame on the Government for not providing for the local authority. The Government has never enabled the local authorities to deal with those issues.

The Government has stood back and hand strapped them.

That is what the Government has done. Some 43,600 people are on the list and the Minister stands over that situation. Shame on you, Minister. You were in that Department long enough and should have dealt with the issue.

It is outrageous of you not to deal with the crisis.

The people of north Wicklow who experienced the awful tragedy of the death of two firemen are forced to campaign for funding for a full-time fire service for an area which has experienced huge increases in population but no commensurate increase in essential services. Across the State, teachers are forced to teach children in prefabs. In particular, I am aware of a number of Gaelscoileanna which have been forced to operate under these totally unacceptable circumstances. In the Taoiseach’s [151] constituency, teachers in Gaelscoil Barra in Cabra have been teaching classes in dilapidated prefabs for ten years. In Clondalkin, Gaelscoil Na Camóige has been existing in second-hand prefabs for 15 years. In the Tánaiste’s constituency, Gaelscoil Portlaoise’s classrooms are made up of eight prefabs for the past nine years. Gael Scoil Gort Alainn in Montenotte, Cork, has been occupying temporary buildings for the past 14 years — there are many more examples.

In the Dublin commuter belt, there has been a complete failure to put in place the education facilities needed. As a consequence, we have the situation where some schools turned away non-Catholic children. In one area of west Dublin, Lucan, Sinn Féin representatives have been inundated with requests from non-Catholic parents to help get their children into primary school. That is some situation in the 21st century when we are talking about developing high-end marketing.

In areas like west Dublin and in particular Dublin 15, parents are putting their children’s names down when they are born and are still forced to camp outside schools for registration in a new term. More and more children are being forced to wait until they are five years of age before admission to school.

The €95 million extra allocated for primary school building is welcome but, as the Minister said, there are 13,000 new enrolments due next year. That €95 million will barely cover the school places needed for them let alone go towards improving the conditions in dilapidated schools right across the State. We will have to scrutinise in more detail the spending plans of the Department of Education and Science.

The programme for Government promised to double the income limit eligibility for parents of children under six years of age and treble it for parents of children with a disability. It has reneged on that commitment. The Government could well afford to help more low income people, to increase it to €250 per week for 2008 as demanded by the Combat Poverty Agency — hardly a radical organisation. Even this would not have gone far enough because all those earning on or below the minimum wage should be eligible for the medical card. They have failed to prioritise access to primary care in this budget.

The state of the health service has been under a particular spotlight in recent weeks and rightly so. Figures from Trolleywatch indicate that whereas there were 159 patients on trolleys and chairs in accident and emergency departments on 4 December last year, yesterday there were 268 patients which is almost a doubling of the number.

152

Services across the State are overstretched. For example, the Rotunda hospital’s capacity was so overcrowded during the summer that women were moved into the hotel adjacent to the hospital for treatment. Children in need of ortho[152] dontic treatment in the Kerry area are currently on waiting lists for six years.

In the health service we continue to have end-of-year budget over-runs and the Health Service Executive has imposed cuts in services to patients. In my own region, the latest fallout from HSE cuts is that there will be no elective surgery in Dundalk hospital in December. We have already seen medical and general surgical elective work postponed in Navan and the planned closure of the orthopaedic unit at Navan for the whole month of December. What savings are involved in the closing of that unit? The nurses are still employed on a salary, as are consultants and administrative staff. The HSE has admitted this fact. To be fair, my colleague, Councillor Joe Reilly, researched this matter and got to the bottom of it.

The only net saving from the closure of that unit for the month relates to the artificial body parts involved — the new hips and knee joints that would have been implanted. We all know that the people who now require those hips and knee joints will still require them in January, February and April. However, they must endure pain and suffering over the Christmas period and then wait in the ever-lengthening queues until that provision is made. In the meantime, I have no doubt many of these people will attend at accident and emergency units over the Christmas and New Year period. Where is the saving? Moreover, the National Treatment Purchase Fund is also getting paid for these operations.

Some 1,700 operations have been cancelled in Our Lady’s Hospital in Navan in the past three years due to bed shortages. Up to eight operations per day have had to be cancelled at Cavan General Hospital and many patients requiring rehabilitation after serious accidents and-or major surgery are being denied admission to the National Rehabilitation Hospital in Dun Laoghaire because of the cutbacks. In other cases, we have the outrageous situation where expensive facilities in hospitals are not operational because of staffing caps applied by the Department and the Minister, which prevents additional people being employed to run them.

153

For example, in Waterford Regional Hospital, a brand new cardiac unit has been built at a cost of approximately €1.2 million and a consultant has been hired to head up the unit. However, the new unit, which is due to open in January 2008, will be left idle as the HSE is refusing to fund another €1.5 million to equip and staff it. Patients in the south-east region must continue travelling to Dublin or Cork for cardiac investigation and treatment. The unit is justified or it would not [153] have been built in the first place, but it will just sit idle.

The accident and emergency ward at the Mercy Hospital in Cork is currently lying idle because of a dispute between the HSE and nurses over staffing levels. When questioned about this on a recent visit to Cork, the Minister’s response was that solving the problem was not her area of responsibility. The Minister for Health and Children is not responsible for anything that happens in the HSE. We should have a motion of no confidence in the Minister every week until we get some movement.

And the Government, because it is its policy with which the Minister is proceeding.

In Tullamore, there is still no date for the full opening of the new hospital which has been ready for about a year.

The Government should be ashamed of themselves for the scandalous, disgraceful condition of the health services in this State.

Twice as many people are lying on hospital beds and sitting in chairs in corridors now compared to last year. The health service is going downhill because the Government is neglecting it.

It is the Government backbenchers who are most responsible for it. They are taking it.

Backbenchers sometimes need to be woken up.

While an open day was held at the Tullamore hospital before the election, it is only providing very limited day services. The poor conditions in the old hospital have been highlighted in the media. At one stage, patients in the hospital had to go for a week without hot water, yet Deputy Curran is shouting.

Sinn Féin wanted a small number of key commitments addressed as part of this budget. They included delivering the 3,000 beds needed and increasing the medical card threshold to €250 per week for 2008 with a commitment to increase it to the level of the minimum wage over the next two years. This budget should have contained a commitment to provide the revenue to roll out the cervical cancer screening programme State-wide in 2008. We also demanded an end to the misuse of public money in the form of tax breaks for private hospitals and the co-location land gift scheme.

If the cervical cancer screening programme had been rolled out, it would have incurred a cost upfront but we should consider all the savings that could have been made with regard to palliative care, trauma for patients and days taken off work. Even an accountant would have worked out that it would be better to put in place the preventative care rather than let people suffer what they must currently suffer.

A key financial pressure on many families is the cost of child care. In particular, the ability of low income parents to participate in paid employment is being threatened by the changes to the child care subvention scheme which the Government is set to introduce. Across the State, many community child care projects are under threat of closure. It is deeply disappointing that this was not a priority in the Minister’s budget speech.

For example, the Larchville and Lisduggan community child care project in Waterford city, which benefited from €1 million in capital funding and which it is hoped will be open in January, will be under huge pressure because of the changes. In the constituency of my colleague, Deputy Caoimhghín Ó Caoláin, child care workers at Farney community crèche in Carrickmacross have predicted that, if this scheme goes ahead, many parents will pull out of the crèche because they cannot afford it, and it will have to double its fees. Like other such child care facilities, it could be forced to close, resulting in loss of jobs and services which allow parents to go to work.

155

Sinn Féin had two key child care demands it wanted to see delivered in this budget. The first was the introduction of a universal pre-school [155] session of 3.5 hours per day, five days a week for all children in the year before they go to school — the National Economic and Social Forum costed this at €136 million. The second demand was the suspension of the child care subvention scheme and extension of the equal opportunities scheme by six months, pending reform of the subvention scheme and entailing detailed consultation with child care providers using the scheme around the State. These measures should have formed a core part of this budget.

With regard to housing, the property market slowdown should have prompted the Government to do what it should have done a decade ago, namely, shift policy towards funding the local authorities to provide social and affordable housing. This budget does not go far enough on social and affordable housing. If more young working people had access to social and affordable housing, this would create more disposable income, which would stimulate the economy rather than having it paid to banks and building societies. Such a shift in Government housing policy would also keep up levels of employment in construction.

Housing should be seen as part of our essential infrastructure, not just as a market for land speculators and property developers. It is also reasonable to borrow to increase the social housing stock. In advance of the budget, Sinn Féin demanded that 12,000 social housing units be constructed in 2008.

Our economy has come on leaps and bounds over the past two decades — I willingly accept this fact. However, we have failed to use the successes of recent years to build for future competitiveness. We are beginning to feel the squeeze with regard to our lack of infrastructure, knowledge capacity and flexibility, and will find it difficult to adapt our economy for future competition. For too long, the Government enjoyed the benefits of an economy based on low costs and low taxes. Developments in China, India and eastern Europe mean we can no longer hope to compete in that kind of market, nor should we.

While we are still competitive, our rankings are slipping. Since 2002, we have fallen 17 places to 22nd in the World Economic Forum’s competitiveness rankings. Our increases in consumption and investment, rather than strong export growth, the slowdown in Irish productivity growth, particularly in high-tech sectors, the contribution of net exports to economic growth being small or negative in recent years and the high reliance on the construction sector for employment have all led to this drop. We have seen a slide-off in both the construction and manufacturing sectors and, worse, we have seen parts of the country become economic blackspots.

156

East Cork recently lost the proposed Amgen development and in Waterford 470 jobs were lost in Waterford Crystal. In Galway yesterday, we [156] saw the loss of 500 jobs from Abbott Ireland. Recent CSO figures confirm Tralee is one of the State’s worst unemployment blackspots. There are 1,300 people out of work in the north Kerry town – an unemployment rate of 14.2%. The Government and its employment agencies have done little or nothing to bring replacement industries to that area. Not one job has been created by the IDA in north Kerry in the past five years, which is some indictment. This neglect of the west and south west can also be seen in the decision to allow Aer Lingus to move from Shannon, which will have a devastating effect on the region.

We need to be more innovative, not traditional, to ensure we are developing the kind of economy we want for the future. Sinn Féin has consistently argued that ending the partition of our country will contribute to the building of a strong competitive economy. Much of the business community, North and South, is behind us in this demand.

Duplicate government and public service structures, an unnecessary administrative burden on those wishing to do business in both jurisdictions and two currencies mean we are competing with ourselves for economic investment and development. Ireland’s physical infrastructure, North and South, also remains a source of competitive disadvantage. Successive Governments over the boom years to date have failed to introduce the infrastructure needed to build competitiveness. We built a motorway that could not handle traffic capacity around Dublin and then handed it over to private operators who profited from it. In fact, it took the authorities ten years to cop on that the M50 needed an extra lane.

Who introduced tolling? It was some of the Deputy’s colleagues, including Liam Lawlor, who introduced it. I would love to see the history of that being teased out on some occasion.

We have a serious public transport deficit both in urban areas, where there is not enough capacity, and in rural areas, which, in many cases, have no public trans[157] port at all. For example, in a situation mirrored across rural Ireland there is no Government subsidised public transport available to the people of north and west Donegal connecting rural parishes to larger urban areas. These communities are losing their bus routes one by one due to commercial considerations, as private operators focus on profitable routes. That was always going to happen because they will suck up profitable routes while the Government will not subvent the less profitable ones.

We pay the highest rates for broadband which is the slowest in Europe. The State was recently ranked 17th of the 27 EU member states for broadband access, behind the accession states of Latvia, Estonia and Slovenia. The root cause of this was the decision of the Government to privatise Eircom. Once again, a profitable company was sold off rather than being used to roll out this crucial infrastructure, which has a major impact on competitiveness and economic development across the island.

We came belatedly to research and development and failed to invest sufficiently in it to redress that imbalance. I welcome today’s announcement on funding for research and development but I am disappointed that there was little or no mention of the need for investment in ICT in secondary schools. In transport, energy, information and communication technology, Ireland’s infrastructure lags well behind that of comparable OECD countries.

I am pleased to see the Minister’s commitment to improving infrastructure. However, as the roll-out of projects under Transport 21 falls far behind schedule, there remains some concern that Departments are purposely slowing down the roll-out of capital projects under the national development plan in order to reduce budgetary pressures in the year ahead.

This was not an innovative budget and there was no radical edge to it. The Government welched on the chance to take some exciting steps on child care, education and obtaining real value for money. I had expected significantly more from the budget. Over the course of the summer we all appreciated that the Minister for Finance, aided by other Ministers, was deliberately damping down budgetary expectations, and with considerable effect. Media speculation clearly indicated that a harsh budget was in store, whereas we got a neutral budget. People may think that because it was neutral it is not bad, but we should examine the missed opportunities for innovation and infrastructural development, as well as the educational and health deficits. However, when Ministers and their agencies are not accountable, how can we expect any significant developments from the Government in terms of providing economic leadership? It simply will not happen. The budget was a disappointment and I rest my case.