This budget constitutes a frank admission of economic incompetence on the part of the Minister for Finance and the Fianna Fáil-Progressive Democrats-Green Party coalition. That a Minister for Finance should think it necessary to change the stamp duty regime twice in six months is an extraordinary admission of failure. The mismanagement of the housing market is written all over the budget. The increased borrowing and limited tax and social welfare packages reflect the hit the Exchequer [132] and the economy have taken from the property slump. The total allocation for improvements in the health service amounts to the equivalent of six days’ spending on health.

On numerous occasions we warned the Government that allowing house prices to race ahead unchecked was making life impossible for buyers and that the economy was over-reliant on construction. However, it refused to listen and the sky is now dark with the chickens that are coming home to roost. This budget is an attempt to muddle through tougher times. It is not the new departure for a new era which the economy needs.

Among the headline changes of the budget, disability services see practically no change. In The Next Steps Forward, pensioners were promised €100 over five years, which is €20 per week. Today they receive €14 per week for contributory pensions and €12 for non-contributory. There is no improvement in medical card coverage and no fundamental reform of PRSI, which was a major element of the Taoiseach’s pre-election promise in his Ard-Fheis speech. There is a small improvement in the income disregard for carers, which will be pretty well meaningless in the context of the inflation that faces them when they do their supermarket shopping.

What about the Green Party? In the spirit of Christmas, the Gordon Ramsay of the Government, the Minister of State with responsibility for food, Deputy Sargent, yesterday put up his tasty recipe for sprouts on his Department’s website. I do not like them myself, but he obviously loves them. His instructions were to cover the pan and boil them briskly until the water is absorbed, add a knob of butter or margarine and keep an eye on them so that they do not burn at a later stage. What happened? The most green aspect of this budget is the cover of the budget document. The knob of butter is spread thinly over all the little social welfare increases. It is interesting to see that while Fianna Fáil are in hock to the builders, the Green Party seems to be going overboard on the Brussels sprouts.

133

The Minister was trying to juggle too many balls today. There were nods to the left, nods to the right, nods to prudence, nods to the public sector, nods to tighter spending controls and nods to greater efficiency. From this Government, a nod is as good as a wink. The Minister offered us a lot less in the package than the sum of its parts and an awful lot less than what the public is entitled to, as we enter far more turbulent times than we have experienced in the past 15 years. The Minister wants to reassure his party and the public, but he cannot escape the message contained in last Saturday night’s White Paper and the grim message contained in the raw figures of declining tax revenues under almost every heading. Not since the 1980s has the graph of Exchequer revenues shown such a sharp dip, not even in the period of currency turbulence [133] between 1992 and 1993. I am sure the Taoiseach must remember those times well, if only for those close and friendly meetings with his adviser and friend, Mr. Padraic O’Connor. As ever, leaders should beware the ides of March. This is also the first time since 1993 that the national debt to GDP ratio has gone up. Stevie Smith wrote a famous poem 50 years ago about a man thrashing about in stormy waters. Onlookers thought he was having a lark, but as the poem states, he was not waving but drowning. That describes the Minister for Finance perfectly today.

This Government no longer commands the economic agenda. It looks on helplessly as an economic storm looms over the horizon with no idea at all on how to come to grips with the new reality. Only a few short months ago, the same Minister offered voters a rosy scenario of our country’s prospects. The Next Steps Forward threw caution to the wind with extravagant claims on tax, PRSI, pensions and living standards. Today’s budget is a survey of what survives and a belated acknowledgement that we are in for a bumpier ride than was suggested to the public in May. Economic growth is on the slide. The Minister’s forecast is for 3% at the beginning of the budget. I do not think he will be lucky enough to hit 3%, the way the housing market is at the moment. Every forecast is a little lower than the one before and nobody can rely on what the Minister says today. It will be adjusted a dozen times before we have another Budget Statement.

Meanwhile, inflation is set to remain stubbornly high and that is as much the fault of this Government’s domestic policies as the fault of international conditions, such as high oil and commodity prices. For most people, the budget is about the cost of living and it has no good news on that front, and little prospect of better news for the time to come. Working families will not be getting similar pay rises to Ministers. Over 1 million of them will earn less in a whole year than the Taoiseach’s proposed rise in salary of €38,000. These people will not have the luxury of being exempt from extra fuel and car taxes like the Ministers who are driven around in State cars. There is a wider gap than ever between what Ministers experience daily and the reality of belt tightening that families will have to endure. People in the ordinary economy are living in a parallel universe to members of this Government.

134

The proposed changes in stamp duty are really a humiliation for the Minister for Finance. In June, he brought in stamp duty reforms which he told us would restore stability and certainty to the housing market. He told us that the changes would be good for certainty, good for affordability and good for society. Today, he had to return to stamp duty for the second time in under six months with his tail between his legs. This is an admission of economic incompetence. The Minister has mismanaged and misjudged the housing market and the Exchequer borrowing he [134] is announcing today is the direct result of that. The bungling of the stamp duty issue has been extraordinary. The flight from the housing market first began with the former Minister Michael McDowell’s attention grabbing stunt. He declared that stamp duty could be abolished because the Government did not need the revenue. It was followed by months of inaction by the Government, followed by a badly constructed and inadequate reform last June. The Government did not realise that the problem with stamp duty was not simply about first-time buyers, but more especially about those trading up.

In the reform proposals for stamp duty put forward by the Labour Party in 2006 and before the election, we pointed to the difficulties for those who were trading up. These people had exhausted their first-time buyer’s relief on buying an apartment, but five years later had one or two children and desperately needed to buy a family home. We told the Minister that was where one of the critical problems existed, but he refused to listen. Since then, the housing market has slumped and the Minister is now trying to rescue it from the wreckage of his policy.

Old habits die hard with this Minister. Somebody buying a second-hand house for €500,000 in the Dublin area will save €11,250, which is welcome. However, somebody buying a house for €2 million will save €28,750. That is the way all these reforms go. In the June reform, stamp duty for first-time buyers was abolished so that many of those who benefitted were very wealthy families able to spend over €1 million on houses for their children. With this new reform, the more one has, the better one does.

Things happen in the real world. There are oil shocks, climate shocks, wars and a sub-prime crisis. I think I was the first person to mention that latter term in this House. One of the journalists working here asked me what sub-prime meant. Now every junior bank clerk and first-year economics student knows all about it. Stuff happens. As former British Prime Minister Harold Macmillan said: “Events, dear boy, events.” Plans for spending and taxation should take into account the major uncertainties that a frothy housing market generates for consumer demand here and across the developed world. One needs a contingency reserve in one’s plans for what may happen and I do not see one in what I heard today. The changes in the housing market are a serious concern for many people, not just for the banks and financial institutions which are worried about the quality of their land and property lending.

135

Before the election the Minister and his party boosted the housing bubble as far as it could go. Now that the bubble has burst the consequences for many ordinary families may be severe. Although Irish house prices are falling, they remain extraordinarily high by international standards. In today’s climate of much higher interest [135] rates young people who want to enter the housing market cannot afford the €350,000 to €450,000 that is being demanded in our cities for modest one-bed and two-bed houses and apartments. Funding a mortgage cost of €1,600 per month on a home cost of approximately €350,000 is an enormous financial strain on most young people whose earnings have not kept pace with interest rate rises. The bursting of the housing bubble happened because the Government encouraged house prices to rise to ridiculous levels.

While house construction costs rose, they did not rise as fast as land prices. Crazy land prices for developers speculating in land fed into enormous price increases for modest family homes. Given the close relationship between Fianna Fáil and the developers, we cannot suggest that Fianna Fáil, the Minister for Finance and the Taoiseach did not know about this. They chose to put their heads in the sand and allow the market to be stoked higher. The Irish banks have been willing accomplices in allowing land for family housing to be bid up to crazy prices. Much of that speculation took place in an environment that was not only tax free, but in which the Minister and his predecessor created an endless range of unnecessary tax breaks for property investment.

The Minister talked about the school shortage but could not even force the builders to hand over sites for schools at current use value. He had to allow his friends in the building industry to demand top dollar for school sites.

Deputy Kennedy is a great survivor from the old Dublin County Council. Let us not get into tribunals now. I would not advise the Deputy or his party to talk about land values or rezoning. The Government must take responsibility for what happened in the housing market. The short-termism of winning votes in the general election led the Minister, his Department and financial regulators to turn a blind eye to what was happening in the financial and housing markets. The measures he introduced today to offer additional mortgage interest relief are welcome, but we need measures to control speculation in housing land. People’s homes are for living in, not for speculative frenzy. If the Government were not so deep in vested interest to land and property speculators, it would already have addressed this issue.

136

[136] The fall in house prices is accompanied by rising rents. How is that for crazy economics? Only in Ireland — we usually say “only in America”. This reflects the impact uncertainty is having on the market. There is a strong underlying demand for housing, but first-time buyers in particular are wary of making such a major purchase in a falling market. It is hard to see where this will end and when prices will level out. There is a substantial downturn in construction. The level of activity and employment in the housing sector was always unsustainable, but the uncertainty on house prices means the number of houses being built is falling rapidly. I did not see in the Budget Statement the Minister’s estimate of the number of houses to be built. I do not know if we will get it but it seemed to be falling below 50,000. I could not find it in the book so I do not know what the Minister expects.

Rising rents help only investors. We need houses as homes for families. It is notable that tax relief for people renting increased by 11%, but by 31% for people renting out a room. The Minister is still trying to have it both ways. He is trying to keep the investors, above all else, happy, but he is not prioritising families that want to buy homes to live in. Given the way the market is turning, in favour of investors as opposed to families and individuals buying to live in an area, we have a problem in every new estate in every part of the country with an over-dominance of investors who are churning tenants. The consequence in many new estates is that communities cannot be built up. The Minister should talk to his local GAA club. If the tenants change every year, how does one develop community? The Minister has not got that balance right. He still tries to have it both ways. Last year he promised to close some of the loopholes in stamp duty that allowed property developers to avoid paying stamp duty on some large transactions. He failed to proceed with that. He listens more to the big developers than to the people who want to buy a home to live in.

137

Today’s budget bears more than a passing resemblance to those of 2003 and 2004 after the 2002 general election. It is standard operational procedure for Fianna Fáil to throw money around before an election and then to retrench, cut back and tax in the immediate aftermath. We are to have a revival of that musical from the McCreevy days. The growth rate of the economy has slowed significantly. It is one thing to present an optimistic picture, but another to be in denial. We are coming down from 14% spending growth and pre-election largesse. The Minister said today he hopes to keep growth in current spending at approximately 8.2%. We need a different approach to fiscal policy to face up to such different circumstances. Unfortunately we do not know [137] and will not know how the corrective measures proposed by the Minister will impact. This year we saw the impact of the HSE trying to live more moderately within its budget. The consequences of the cutbacks were not pleasant.

Even as expenditure growth is reduced to a more sustainable level we must have regard to key economic and social objectives. It is unfortunate though not surprising that the Minister failed in that task. Ireland may be heading for a period of slower growth. It will take a number of years for the imbalances built up under this Government’s stewardship to unwind. However even a lower growth rate, skilfully managed, should yield a dividend. In most European countries a growth rate of 2.5% to 3%, which the Minister projects, would yield social improvements and a social dividend for families.

What are we getting for the 8% increase in current spending? There is a fairly minimal social welfare budget and most Departments are being told to soldier on for another year, without any extra resources for improvements in service. The allocation to the fire services in the Department of the Environment, Heritage and Local Government failed to provide for a full local fire service in Bray, even after the tragedy that town experienced recently.

The vast bulk of the expenditure plans in this document are devoted to keeping things as they are. In other words, it is the Government’s intention to simply plough on, doing things the way it has always done them. There will be plenty of rhetoric about the need for other people to be realistic and more productive, but there will be no serious endeavour to change the way the Government conducts its affairs so that real progress can be seen from this 8% spending growth.

The Minister has provided for a significant increase in capital spending at 12%. We have urged a more ambitious capital investment programme for years, in public transport and research. We welcome the additional resources for the national development programme, but I wish I could have more confidence in the Cabinet’s capacity to deliver the projects on time and within budget. I can cite two cases in point. Ireland lags dangerously behind as regards broadband access. The CEO of eBay, a big employer in my constituency, tells of his “embarrassment” when he has to reveal Ireland’s weakness in this area to his international colleagues. The percentage of Irish businesses and homes with access to broadband is one of the lowest among Europe’s leading states. More importantly, he highlights how this might seriously reduce Ireland’s chances in securing new foreign investment projects.

138

I want to also mention the annual bugbear of integrated ticketing, an essential precondition for the operation of improved public transport. Tens of millions have been spent with no end product to date. It has not moved forward one iota in the past 12 months, so who is in charge? Most major [138] cities operate one, even where there is a mixed delivery of services by private and public operators. Munich, Rome and Lisbon operate smart cards that offer seamless transfer from buses to trains to trams. I wonder whether the Taoiseach has ever used the metro link of his beloved Manchester to get to Old Trafford, or does he get his friends there to lay on a limousine service?

This is where aspiration gives way to cold reality. Extra billions may be allocated to the capital programme, but will it all disappear in extra costs, overheads, consultancy and service charges? The record of this bunch of Ministers in the delivery of services on time and inside budget is hardly inspiring. Capital investment is not the only investment governments need to make. They also need to invest in communities and the people for both economic and social reasons. The Fianna Fáil manifesto at the last election contained a number of worthwhile initiatives, which if implemented, would mark real social progress. I do not pretend that all of these plans can be implemented straight away. However, the budget could have begun the process of implementing the most important of them. We were promised 4,000 new teachers for our schools, a doubling of the capitation grant for primary schools. In the area of health, we were promised 1,500 extra hospital beds and 2,000 hospital consultants. There were to be 2,000 extra gardaí on our streets. In social welfare there were to be further increases in eligibility as regards the carer’s allowance. I do not regard what has been done today as coming anywhere near fulfilling that promise. On and on it goes, not to mention all the tax promises that were made in the Ard-Fheis speech, when the Taoiseach threw money around like confetti.

I do not expect the Minister to implement all these plans straight away, as I have said, but he could make a start. Along with most Deputies, I would love to see some of those 2,000 gardaí on the beat in my constituency in the future. I could certainly find work for the 4,000 teachers and the 2,000 hospital consultants would make a real difference to the health services. How many of them will be employed this year and what planning is being done to ramp up teacher training?

The Minister claims his budget leaves a strong financial balance sheet. The jury is out on that claim, but the social balance sheet is not as strong as it ought to be, in any sense. As a country, Ireland must get past the antiquated notion that all capital spending is investment and all current spending is consumption. The knowledge economy we aspire to is driven by education, which is crying out for investment at almost every level. There is an urgent requirement for more capitation funding in primary schools, a need for targeted reductions in class sizes and we need specific measures to deal with literacy and numeracy problems.

139

[139] Addressing many of these issues will require current spending, but it is ultimately investment in the productive capacity of the economy. Studies show that it is the quality of teaching that most influences the quality of outcome in educational achievement. There is no better investment in the future of our country, for example, than to set out a plan to provide universal free pre-school education. The return on that investment would be enormous, but this budget does not recognise that type of expenditure as an investment at all. I find it surprising that Ministers so consistently refuse to listen to the National Competitive Council’s advice on this issue. It is a Government agency that is asked for its advice year in year out. It points out that those countries with enviable records in economic competitiveness set great store by the provision of early childhood education. It is a topic of lively debate in the USA, for example. This winter’s headline book from Harvard University Press is called The Sandbox Investment. I would like the Taoiseach to read it with the same care he has devoted to Robert Putnam’s book, Bowling Alone. The Harvard book argues that pre-school investment has a priceless payoff. The author states simply that the kids first policy is smart economics. Putting kids and education first is smart economics, according to Harvard, this year.

There are more than 878,000 workers, as per page C22 in the budget, on such low incomes that they do not qualify to pay tax at all. These are people for whom a winter ’flu without a medical card or a doctor-only card becomes a nightmare, particularly if they have one or two children and must make multiple visits to a doctor at €50 per time, along with another €30 for medication. If any member of such a family gets sick for more than a three-week period, medical costs for just the ’flu could easily amount to €300, the equivalent of a full week’s net wages. The Society of St. Vincent de Paul refers to the many people, the 878,000 in this category, as the working poor. These are people in work on low wages. They are not paying much tax or PRSI, but they have to pay doctor’s bills, for school trips, rent or a mortgage on an affordable house if lucky enough to get one.

140

Child dependant allowances are critical for such families. I welcome the increases today, small as they are. However, they should be paid at least on a fortnightly basis. The method of paying them on a monthly basis and the early years supplement on a quarterly basis does not help the budgeting of families on the margin, who need every penny on a regular basis. Family income supplement, FIS, has to be made more accessible for such families. A whole range of Government agencies, such as the National Economic and Social Council, have researched this and suggested, in line with proposals made by the Labour Party a long time ago, a supplementary child [140] benefit payment or a refundable tax credit. The Government has been stalling, perhaps because such a proposal would be costly, and I have no doubt there would be administrative difficulties to be overcome.

Nonetheless, such a payment could make a significant impact on the lives of the one in nine children who live in poverty. In this respect, one of the groups most at risk of poverty is children in lone parent families. The one parent family payment is structured in such as way as to make it harder for people to move into financial self-sufficiency while also making it harder to form long-term relationships.

Social welfare penalises young people who want to get married or live together openly. The penalty ranges from €70 and upwards per week to more than €1,200 per month if rent allowance is involved. Some time ago, the Minister promised to put an end to or modify the co-habitation rule because it makes no sense to encourage parents to live apart when they could be living together and caring for their children.

What about individualisation? The Minister also presides over this tax penalty on a parent who wants to stay at home with children, particularly during the baby years, or on someone who may want to stay at home and care for an older relative. I recall the Minister promised this time last year, as well as in his manifesto, that he would address the issue. At present, a married couple where only one person works pays an extra €6,240 per year in taxation. I did the maths on the changes quickly and after this budget the penalty will increase to €6,270 per year. A two income couple will pay €6,270 per year less in tax if their income is €70,800 or higher. This is the legacy of Charlie McCreevy with regard to individualisation and the penalty on choice for families who may want to care for their children full-time at home.

Last year, the Minister introduced a modified table of who pays income tax at the higher rate. Today’s figures show a shift up from 19.8% last year to 21.58% of families who pay tax at the 41% rate. Even on the modified tables the Minister now provides on the people who will drift into the 41% bracket, this is an increase of 66,000 people. This is because the changes in the bands and credits are not and will not be sufficient to provide for the increase in wage inflation expected next year. More and more people, particularly young single people earning more than €35,000, will pay tax at 41% if they receive a bonus or an overtime payment. They will also pay PRSI so they will continue to be heavily targeted by the Government.

141

The Government proposes to use €50 million of taxpayers money in 2008 to pay fines to the EU Commission because Ireland is above the emissions target. We pay higher electricity prices to the ESB so it can buy emission allowances because it plans to emit so much more CO 2 than [141] the allowance it received in the emissions trading scheme. If the Government had developed renewable energy properly instead of frustrating it at every turn, renewable energy would be producing much more electricity than it does at present.

There would be no need for higher electricity prices to buy CO 2 allowances and no need for the Government to pay fines to the EU.

What was mentioned with regard to the Department of Communications, Energy and Natural Resources and the Minister, Deputy Eamon Ryan, namely, €13 million for this and €20 million for that, is a demonstration. The Minister will receive little for real changes with regard to how we will reduce our carbon footprints and emissions. The Government’s climate change strategy is way behind on what it indicated.

What about today’s announcements on motor tax? We support the proposal to give reductions in VRT to people who buy emission reducing cars. This is the proper direction to go. However, last year hybrid vehicles accounted for less than 2% of sales of motor vehicles. A Lexus, which I understand is the model of choice for many people, costs €30,000. How many families will be able to opt for the Lexus to avail of the cut in VRT?

Let us be honest about it and call a spade a spade. The increases in motor tax are about raising revenue and not revenue neutrality.

I must be excused because I am not good on cars. The tax on vehicles under 2.5 litres will increase by 9% and on vehicles over 2.5 litres by 11%. A person with an average car living an hour from Dublin but with no public transport must use that car to get into Dublin.

This will not change people’s behaviour with regard to emissions. It will simply tax people because they must drive to and from work in the absence of public transport.

Let us not call this a great green revolution. When we consider the budget with regard to the Green Party, we see €13.27 million has been provided for energy research. This is welcome but not great. A further €13 million has been given to the Minister for Communications, Energy and Natural Resources, Deputy Ryan, for issues relating to energy consumption.

Deputy Bernard J. Durkan Deputy Bernard J. Durkan

142

I do not know where the Green Party members were. They must have been out doing the Brussels sprouts rather than at the Cabinet discussing this matter. They must have been cooking up a storm. The key issue is that in the transport programme, €1.7 billion out of €2.7 billion is for the roads programme. Leaving the M3 and Tara out of this, we were told by the Green Party that we would see a shift from roads in favour of public transport. I do not see it in this budget. I also noticed that while the Minister mentioned existing public transport projects in Dublin, he did not mention the metro to the airport, the interconnector or the new metro line to the north side where Deputy Kennedy lives.

Is this a green budget? The quantum leap we need to make to decarbonise our economy and society requires a strength of purpose which comes from a genuine belief that we have a genuine duty to halt global warming. It will never come from a political marriage of convenience where the senior partner went for tax raising on green issues rather than trying to genuinely change people’s behaviour. A couple of green Ministers do not a green Government make. The buck stops with the budget. The Ministers for the Environment, Heritage and Local Government and Communications, Energy and Natural Resources, Deputies Gormley and Ryan, can lobby all they want but Fianna Fáil will never let them near the purse strings of the Department of Finance or, in other words, real power. We saw that today. My summary of this green budget is that it has a light sprinkling of parsley, although I do not know whether they will go for the sprouts.

Inflation was 4.8% in October, which is more than most people’s pay increases. Many private sector workers have had no pay increases at all in the past year. Due to Government incompetence, consumers have had to endure large increases in electricity and gas prices which the Labour Party were proven correct to describe as totally unnecessary. Inflation impacts most on those on low incomes and social welfare, for whom food and fuel are significant elements of the weekly budget. Given that the current scen[143] ario is likely to continue, it is important that the Government develops a mechanism to protect the living standards of those on low incomes. Today’s budget did not adequately address that issue.

My greatest concern with this budget is that it says little regarding the threats from a changing world economy. The changes currently taking place in the United States in the area of credit have not yet fully worked out. I would like to know whether the Minister has a plan B should the chill winds we are experiencing become worse. It can be amusing for some people to see the masters of the universe and the bankers sweat but it is not appropriate in this case to feel a sense of schadenfreude. With the credit crunch, ordinary businesses, self-employed people and families on average incomes will suffer. Already, business people are finding that borrowing has become more expensive.

Public confidence in this Government’s ability to manage competently is decreasing and the feel-good factor is disappearing rapidly, two sentiments which are more important to sustaining Fianna Fáil in power than any factor of Government personality or policy. While I hope that the times will not be too bad, particularly for those on lower incomes, we may be about to witness a transformation of politics. Today, the Tánaiste played to Fianna Fáil backbenchers in his bid to succeed the Taoiseach when he should have been looking after the wider economy. Only time will tell whether the gamble he took will be successful.
