I welcome the opportunity to contribute to this debate. I compliment the Minister for Finance, Deputy Cowen, on delivering a balanced budget in more difficult economic times than in recent years. It was a prudent budget which maintains public services while providing for significant growth in our capital programme. Listening to the delivery of the Budget Statement and reading the reports in the newspapers, it is clear that it inspires business confidence, which is important.

I acknowledge the fact that Deputies Ring and Durkan have stayed in the House for a few minutes.

It is important that they hear our views on where we see Ireland. It is certainly not the picture that the Deputies tried to portray earlier. Deputy Ring referred in his comments to the budgets of 1995 to 1997 and made a big issue of delivering a budget surplus. He was critical of the Government’s borrowing of €5 billion.

I will go back to 1995 and 1997 in a moment, but to put it in context, the reason we are borrowing this money

The reason we are borrowing €5 billion is to maintain a significant capital programme. We will not have stop-start development of infrastructure. The money we are borrowing is about 0.9% of GDP.

Before Deputy Ring leaves, there is one comment I want to make which he might find interesting. He comes in here—— 

Deputy Ring made a big issue of the fact that in the period 1995 to 1997 the coalition Government returned a budget surplus. It did so but, to its shame, it did it by abandoning those in need. It delivered the most miserable social welfare increases at that time.

It was on the backs of the vulnerable people in this country.

It was on the backs of those people that Deputy Ring stood up tonight to boast about the budget surpluses. The Deputy’s party walked away from them.

It was the most miserable increase in social welfare ever, but the Deputy boasted that his party produced a budget surplus.

Fine Gael did not have a better economy by any stretch of the imagination.

Deputy Ring is living in a dream world. To turn around and say that the economy of 1995, 1996 or 1997 was better than the economy we have now is a load of rubbish.

Fine Gael had a budget surplus in one respect, but it abandoned the vulnerable people and its social welfare budget was a disgrace.

Deputy Durkan spoke about Ireland being less competitive and jobs moving from Donegal and so forth. We heard Deputy Blaney refer to the workforce being reskilled and re-employed.

It is worth noting that we have the highest ever number of people working, approximately 2.1 million. The Deputies should not talk us into a recession because that is not where we are going. It is important to remember——

The Deputy is correct in that we will not be competitive if it comes to making T-shirts, but we are creating jobs in products higher up the value chain, such as research and development, biotechnology and so forth, and adding value.

The Deputy should not talk us into a recession.

I acknowledge that we are not competitive when it comes to making T-shirts.

A number of speakers stated that the good times are gone and we have squandered the money, but we have not. We have invested the money in a significant range of services and infrastructure. Less than a decade ago, special needs education did not exist in this country. Between resource teachers and special needs assistants, there are approximately 17,000 people employed today. When people on the opposite side stand up to speak, they do not acknowledge this fact. There are 8,000 SNAs alone. We have invested the resources we have created in the past decade.

In a range of services, we have looked after the most vulnerable, the poor and the elderly in ways that had not been done previously.

There have been real increases in child benefit. We introduced the early child care supplement. This range of services would not have been possible one decade ago.

To say this is a waste or squander is untrue. Those people who are the beneficiaries and recipients of the payments would not agree with the Deputy. How many minutes have I left?

On a serious note, I have listened to many contributions on the budget debate. During the Minister’s pre-budget outlook, we discussed existing levels of service, ELS. I sit on the Committee of Public Accounts, which examines Department’s outturns and was chaired by Deputy Noonan in recent years. It is not fair to suggest that changes do not take place because they do. In the five years I have been a member of the PAC, all of the new projects in our roads programme are coming in on time and within budget because of the changes that have been made instead of coming in late and over budget consistently.

We must tackle and perform a major review of ELS across the public service.

Were it a private company, we would expect and anticipate to continue providing ELS at a reduced cost, that there would be innovation and an increased use of technology. Everyone needs to buy into it, not just frontline managers, but unions, workers——

I am discussing the public service.

If we are to maintain existing levels of service and introduce new programmes and services, we must find greater efficiencies in the public service. The services being delivered across all Departments must be analysed with a strategic view to providing them next year at a reduced level, not at this year’s level plus the rate of inflation. This is what private industry strives to and succeeds in doing. We must introduce the same levels into the public service.
