The truth is this budget represented a very stern test of the leadership of the Minister. It was a test to see if he had the courage to break down the patterns of incompetence and indifference which has surrounded this complacent Government and the vision to embrace real reform and see real change in the way we spend money. This is what the country has been crying out for. The bleak answer today is that he is not willing to face [120] those challenges. He has bottled the challenge; he is all bark and no bite. He cannot see that the reason our public finances are in the diabolical state they are in is the sloppy, self-indulgent and wasteful way this Government has spent money.

The Minister is a back seat passenger in the Department of Finance just as he was a back seat passenger in other Departments before this. He is avoiding the imprint of failure by simply not facing up to the challenges which ought to be addressed. As a result of his behaviour, we have seen that the gains of the Celtic tiger have been frittered away. The tax bonanza has been spent but we do not have a world-class infrastructure, a world-class health service or efficiency in the public sector. The money has been spent but we have not delivered the change for which the country was crying out. We trail every league in service delivery. Whether in infrastructure, health or waiting times, we are at the bottom of the league.

The Minister’s reign in the Department of Finance has been characterised by leaving problems to fester until it is too late, when the damage is done and the benefit of action has been impaired. We see that again today. He waited for the housing market to collapse before he addressed the needed reform in stamp duty. As a result of his obstinate refusal to reform that tax, we have seen housing sales diminish month by month to half what they were at the beginning of January this year. He is a great man to have six months after a crash in the housing market.

The same is true of the environment. This Government promised it would reform VRT in 2002 and here we are six years later. It is six years during which 600,000 extra cars went on the road — 600,000 extra cars with more carbon emissions now than six years ago. That is the reality. It is too late to address these issues. The time to address them was much earlier so we would not face huge fines for which we will have to borrow to pay in the year ahead.

The Minister can talk the talk but he does not walk the walk. Prudence and reform are new sound bites he has picked up in the Department of Finance and he delivers them in sombre tones as befits his hoped for new status in Government. The truth is that it is all about sound bites. There is no action to back it up. It is simply not enough to change the rhetoric while perpetuating the bad practices of the past. The public will look back on this budget as one where the opportunity to take real decisions, which would change the way money is spent, was fluffed and the soft option was taken instead.

121

It is a hit and hope budget — persisting on the same path but hoping for a better outcome this time. However, we know what will happen when that hope is not realised. Ordinary families and small businesses will have to pick up the cost. It will not be the 16 Ministers who have trousered [121] their huge increase in public pay, who are happily insulated in their State cars from any changes to motor tax and who are free from any risk to their pensions while many in the private sector are seeing the collapse in the value of their pensions as we speak.

Under the Minister’s stewardship, the high promises trumpeted earlier this year are all gone. Nothing has been done in this budget in respect of tax reform. The prudent surpluses are gone. In terms of Ireland being a debt free country, we are heading in the wrong direction. The 8,000 extra frontline staff are not being delivered. Instead we are seeing obstinate refusal in the face of all evidence to adopt some serious-minded reforms, to stop the big pay increases to senior people in the public service until results are delivered, to demand efficiency and performance from the big spenders, to stop the creeping growth in bureaucracy and to face the flaws in decentralisation which is manifestly failing in so many areas. None of this serious reform has been addressed.

They say that if one gets the reputation for being an early riser, one can lie in bed all day. That could be said of this Government. In the early years, it was alert and ready to face changes. It felt the throb of the economy and it moved to deal with issues and real challenges but that day is long gone.


They have got used to lying in in the morning, bingeing on junk food and not exercising. The result is what we see today. At the slightest hint of deterioration in the economy, we see the public finances plunge from a €4 billion surplus to a €2 billion deficit. That is some achievement for a Minister — to have squandered all that money and to have so little to show for it. It is shoddy spending habits.

Under the guise of this debt fuelled tax bonanza, the Government has thrived. We have seen Government spending grow by an alarming six percentage points of GNP. That is three percentage points extra on income tax and three percentage points extra on VAT. That is the reality of the extra costs this Government has loaded on in the space of seven years. Now the property boom bonanza is gone, those realities will come home to roost. Those tax bills will have to be met and that is why we have not seen proper indexation of the tax code today and no proper provision for tax reform which was trumpeted from the hill tops a few months ago. That money has been spent and there is little to show for it.

122

The changed economy has brought new rhetoric. We hear this bleating about productivity, reform and equity. However, it is like listening to a chain smoker talking about the threats and dangers of smoking. He has known it for years but he has done nothing about it in the past and [122] is doing nothing about it today. There is no reform in this budget and there is no willingness to face up to the changes we need to make to get efficiency and delivery at the frontline from the huge budgets that have been built up. It is a hit and hope budget and it is simply not sustainable.

Today’s budget presents us with €3.9 billion extra in spending and €1.6 billion extra in tax. In any man’s language that is spending more than double the revenue coming in. That is not sustainable. One cannot go on plugging the hole by borrowing, as the Government plans to do this year. This time last year we were told we would have a surplus of €1.8 billion in 2008 and yet the Minister told us today we would have a deficit of that amount.

That is because the soft options are being taken. The money is being spent but it is not delivering and the soft option of borrowing is being taken.

Looking ahead, the prospects of those who cheered the Minister a moment ago, seeing their great programme for Government being delivered are nil. If one looks at the figures the Minister projects for taxation for 2010, one will see it is €6.3 billion off what was forecast when the manifesto was published. That blows the entire manifesto out of the water.

We now have no strategy from Government. Its programme for Government does not stand up to any scrutiny. The promises, such as the 2,000 extra gardaí, the 4,000 extra teachers or the 2,000 extra consultants, have gone in a puff of smoke because the money is spent.

The tragedy, of course, is that it is not just these manifesto promises that will be broken once again. We have seen it time and again from this Government. The tragic truth is that if the economy continues to be managed the same way the Minister is managing it today in this budget, we will quickly be unable to afford the investment in infrastructure that we need. We will see serious threats to this economy emerge if he continues with this approach.

123

We need reform in the way public money is spent. We needed it seven years ago. Even now, it would be welcome but there is no serious reform being delivered here. This Minister has spurned the opportunity of reform every time it has been presented to him. He spurned it when benchmarking was there, a huge €1.3 billion increase which could have leveraged change. He spurned it most recently when his own big pay increases were coming up for scrutiny when he [123] could have demanded performance before they would be paid to senior managers.

He failed to bring in the sort of scrutiny that the Committee of Public Accounts recommended to this House in a very good report less than two years ago. He has failed to bring in that scrutiny because he is afraid to see people scrutinise the way public money is spent. He has run away from that measure, which could have leveraged reform.

Instead, he has taken the easy option. In the last period when this Government was in office, it created 178 new agencies. This is the sort of new outsourced Government that is unaccountable. They all have their own public relations and human relations departments, as well as their own glossy annual reports and personalised Christmas cards. We will see them all flowing in during the next few weeks. However, they are not delivering value and need to be rationalised. Many of them duplicate work done elsewhere. We need serious change.

It is not good enough for Ministers to join the solemn chorus of calls for wage restraint and reform when they are like the army generals sitting in their armchairs way back behind the line asking others to go over the top into machine gun fire. When it comes to their comforts, there will be no change.

Their four new parliamentary committees, their three new Ministers of State with their entourages and their own huge pay increases, which include €38,000 for the Taoiseach, have all been paid and it is others, such as pensioners, who we ask to make do with so much less. Ordinary workers on the average industrial wage are asked to pay tax at 41%, the same rate as that paid by a millionaire. Where is the sense of priority or justice from a Government that approaches issues like that?

The tragic truth is that we would have a resilient economy today that would be capable of dealing with the challenges if the programme of reform had been started. We have only to look across the water to see what Gordon Brown and the Labour Party in the UK did when they demanded annual efficiency changes and over the period in question were able to release what would be the equivalent in Ireland of 6,000 extra frontline staff to frontline positions to deliver services. We could have [124] already resolved the question of our need for 2,000 extra gardaí, 2,000 extra consultants or 2,000 extra teachers. That could have been resolved by a proper efficiency approach along the lines of the approach taken not only in the UK but in many other countries. However, this Government just wanted to throw money at problems. The tougher the problem, the more it threw money at it and the more it did not face up to reform. That is the sad situation.

Who will be the casualties of this unreformed Government that is spending money freely and not delivering results? It will not be Ministers, that is for sure. It will be older people waiting for care, children with special needs abandoned to dropping out of school early and the vulnerable communities that are prey to drugs and the violence of organised crime. They will be the victims who will pay for a budget that will not face up to the realities of an economy which is working superbly in the private sector but which has not addressed the issue of productivity, efficiency and reform in the public sector. Most of the problems we face as a country come directly from Departments controlled by the 15 Ministers across the floor. That is where the high cost and our loss of competitiveness is coming from. We have a Government complacently whistling its way along and not addressing this crying need for reform.

Again, we see a huge disappointment in the area of taxation. Indexing bands and credits to simply meet the cost of wage increases was a core commitment and one which, above all, the Minister said he would honour but he has not honoured it. He has not honoured the 4.5% increase in wage thresholds which he said he would deliver. To meet the cost of inflation now, one would need €90, which he has not delivered.

We have also seen that, once again, more ordinary taxpayers on modest incomes will be plunged into the top rate as a result of not indexing. Next year, 750,000 people will be on the top rate of tax of 41%. That is the reality. Even people on the average industrial wage will find themselves on the top rate. Is this not an extraordinary situation? Here was a Minister who promised in the last programme for Government that only 20% of taxpayers would be on the top rate. Instead we see a massive 750,000 of them on the top rate. He has reneged on that promise in respect of 250,000 people. We still see ordinary people being asked to pay tax at the same rate as multimillionaires, which is not acceptable and must change.

Again we see that many people who need a leg up are frozen out of tax relief.

For example, over 600,000 people in the private sector do not have any pension whatsoever. We were promised that we would see a one for one scheme. Indeed I believe the Green Party was the first to advocate having such a scheme to help the lowest paid people invest in pensions for their retirement so that they would not be solely dependent on social welfare pensions and would not be plunged into poverty in their old age. Nothing is being done about that. We have had two huge reports, no doubt at huge cost, and nothing is being done to address the needs of those with no pension cover.

I suppose that even during straitened times, families would have looked for some support to cope. What do they find? The sum total of €1.38 per week is offered as extra child benefit at a time when the price of all the basic food items — bread, butter, milk and eggs — is increasing by 15% or 16%. What Minister could say that a child could be supported with an extra €1.38 per week in such a climate of rising costs?

A slightly better increase of €2 per week in the child care supplement is being offered. One might say this is extraordinarily generous but the reality is that out of their pre-tax income, people must find an incredible €18,000 per child to support children in child care. That is the reality in the tiger economy of today. Families where both parents are forced to work face that obstacle of €18,000 for each child. This issue must be addressed and has been persistently ignored by this Government.

Instead of trying to address this, the Government is, once again, penalising people who opt to drop out of the workforce to provide care at home for a period. The penalty they face has been ratcheted up once again today. An extra €1,400 penalty is being imposed on people who opt to stay at home. The combination of the bands and the PAYE allowance they will give up by dropping out of the workforce is now an astonishing €8,500. That is the tax penalty the Minister thinks should be imposed on a parent who decides to opt out of the workforce for a period to care for a young child. Where is the justice in that and the commitment that we would see home carer’s tax credit doubled? That has disappeared and a measly tax credit increase of €130 was offered. These issues have been festering and have not been addressed.

Another hidden element that will affect children and young families is that there is no improvement in the medical card.

We were told there would be a major increase in the supplement in respect of children and that it would be indexed in accordance with the industrial wage. A family with two children is deemed by the Minister to be too wealthy to receive a medical card if the parents are on the minimum wage. At €17,800 they will be deemed too wealthy to receive a medical card. What sort of planning for the future is that if low income families cannot be permitted receive care for their children from a doctor when needed? It is so shortsighted and such an abandonment of the sense of equity that the Minister said would inspire his budget that I cannot understand the thinking.

Children will be affected by the decision to provide no extra psychological assessment services in the coming year.

Many children with special needs have been dependent on psychological assessment and many school principals must play God in deciding which children with serious problems will be allowed have a psychological assessment. That situation will continue in a budget that was supposed to address the situation with equity. We will continue to see children accommodated in temporary accommodation. There is no squaring up to the needs of families. Despite difficult times we should have found space to address families. There is no greater long-term investment than investing in the future of our children, particularly those in low income backgrounds. We want to see them progress, not drop out of school because their needs were not diagnosed in the early stage of their education.

There is little for older people to cheer about in this budget. The sum of €14 is not bad, compared to what Ministers might have given out, but it compares poorly to the €700 the Minister awarded himself. Older people are facing high increases in costs at present. Basic foodstuffs, which take up much of the older person’s budget, are increasing extraordinarily rapidly, as is fuel. At least €12.50 of that €14 will be absorbed by meeting the increased cost of products. There will be little spare cash for people to make any slight improvement in their lifestyle.

Other areas forgotten in this budget include the living alone allowance. Why do we decide that 121,000 people who live alone should not get more than €7.70? This has not been changed in decades. Why do we decide that widows, who live alone with children, cannot access the free scheme unless they are aged 60? These are small changes that could have brought the equity that the Minister said would inspire his budget.

127

[127] There will be an extra 60 cent per week in the fuel scheme to meet the higher fuel costs for older people this winter. It will not go very far.

The tragedy is that making ends meet is not the only worry facing older people. They have been waiting for proper standards of policing of nursing home care and other care facilities. They have been waiting to see the high chance of picking up infections in hospitals addressed. They continue to wait. They have seen home care packages axed because the bureaucracy in the HSE ran out of money. They are part of the 200,000 unrecognised people waiting to see a consultant for the first time, waiting to join the queue of 41,000 for a medical procedure. This budget is letting old people down at a time when major increases in health budgets were committed to by the taxpayer. The results that would make a difference to their lifestyle have not been delivered.

The conversion of the Minister to changing stamp duty is something I must welcome. I argued for it before and during the election. I tabled an amendment in June to implement it. Who opposed it on every occasion?

It was the Minister for Finance, Deputy Cowen, who told us it would be inequitable and would spook the market.

If there was one thing about which he was consistent it was that reform of stamp duty was not on his agenda. His agenda was full of good things, including a reduction in the tax rate from 41% to 40%, PRSI was to be reformed and home care tax credits were to be reformed. The list of tax reform was lengthy. The one thing he would not reform is the one thing he has changed today, a victory for the persuasive argument of the Fine Gael Party.

It is welcome but it is coming too late, after stamp duty revenue and sales have halved in the past nine months and confidence is at a low ebb. It does not represent a proper housing policy and we must examine the detail of a dysfunctional housing policy over which the Minister and his colleagues preside.

128

I welcome the increase in mortgage relief, a concession of €800 in cash terms. It will go some of the way to meet the €3,000 extra that young [128] families have faced in the past 12 months as a result of increases in interest rates. It will be a welcome assistance.

However, I part company with the Minister on the matter of rental relief. Why has he decided that those who rent should get only €1.50 extra in rent relief? These are among the poorest families, who cannot get on the housing ladder, are in a weak position and cannot get loans from mortgage companies. They are not given anything. The total of the subsidy they will receive from the Minister is less than €15 per week. Rents in Dublin are €500 per week, as the Minister knows. What sort of contribution is this towards those in the weakest position? Rents have increased by 20% in most cities over the past 12 months and the Minister can only come up with €1.50 per week extra in rent relief. The Minister is out of touch with what is happening in the housing market. Other schemes are similarly out of touch. Regarding the rental accommodation scheme, why must low income families wait 18 months, being unemployed, before they can qualify for support from the public sector? What is the sense in that and what sort of poverty trap is it creating? That is the big idea from the Department of the Environment, Heritage and Local Government to address the housing crisis.

What is the situation in respect of the shared ownership scheme? The subvention element in the shared ownership scheme only applies if one’s income is less than €28,000 but no one in the country would be considered for a housing loan with an income under €28,000. The shared ownership scheme is a dead letter scheme and is collapsing as we speak. It has ceased to support families who need our support in a difficult time.

I give the Minister one cheer for some reform of stamp duty but I do not endorse his housing strategy that is failing so many people. Even the Central Bank, hardly the source of radical thinking, tells us that half the people in the country cannot afford to buy a house and that this is unsustainable. The tragedy is that the bill for high cost Government has come home to roost, not just for taxpayers but for those trying to compete in the real economy.

129

The Government and its policies accounted for half of all inflation during the past seven years. In addition, it loaded stealth taxes equivalent to €3,500 per annum onto every family. Inflation in sectors controlled by the Government is running at two and a half times the rate that obtains in equivalent sectors in other eurozone countries. Ireland has become a high-cost country primarily as a result of Government action. I will provide one statistic which, more than any other, illustrates this fact. Price increases in sectors controlled by Government during the past seven years stand at 45%. Manufacturing companies trying to export goods abroad — the Minister for Enterprise, Trade and Employment, Deputy [129] Martin, will be aware of this — have seen their prices fall by 17%. That is the contrast.

Government Ministers are able to impose price increases of 45% but in the real world, people are being obliged to make major cuts, economise, make cost savings and still deliver products on time in order to survive. That sort of culture needs to be introduced in the public sector. However, thinking along these lines is miles away from that which occurs around the Cabinet table.

With his decision to increase motor tax by 10%, the Minister is again dipping into the pockets of motorists. This is not a green tax. Any notion that it is such a tax does not stand up to scrutiny. This is more about picking the pocket than about protecting the planet.

It will, however, generate revenue. The truth is that the average motorist already pays €2,500 each year in tax. It has been estimated that the environmental damage done by most cars with petrol engines stands at 9 cent per litre. However, the Minister is collecting €2,500 per annum from motorists. They are a soft touch and that is what is behind the change in motor taxation.

The change to which I refer has nothing to do with reforming the position in order to meet environmental needs.

I welcome the changes relating to VRT. These changes are timely and I agree with the Ministers for Communications, Energy and Natural Resources and the Environment, Heritage and Local Government, Deputies Ryan and Gormley, on the need to take climate change seriously. However, people should not forget that the Government produced a strategy in 2000 which advocated introducing a carbon tax by 2002, increasing investment in buses, ceasing coal use at Moneypoint by 2008, rebalancing VRT, introducing integrated traffic management and supplying 12.5% of our electricity needs from renewable energy sources by 2005. Precisely none of this has come to pass.

130

It is time to reform the system of VRT. Why did we not reform it before we built 500,000 additional houses, put 600,000 extra cars onto our roads and failed to take heed of patterns of energy use? The consequence is that we now face a fine because we failed dismally to meet our international obligations. We must now borrow to pay this fine. In the years since changes to VRT should have been introduced, average emissions per car have increased by 11%. The time to [130] act was several years ago. I welcome the belated conversion of the Minister. However, as with everything else he has ever done, he acts only when he is forced to do so. He does not anticipate change or make changes in a timely manner.

It is well past the time for a wake up call. The alarm bells have long been ringing about the way our public finances are being managed. People want to see change. It is not enough for the Minister to repeat the mantra that the Government is committed to the NDP. The latter is important, particularly if it is delivered effectively, on time and on budget and if the projects relating to it stand up to scrutiny. Taxpayers should not be asked to issue a blank cheque. If the Minister is serious about this matter, he should publish the evaluations relating to NDP projects in order that we might say that they will deliver value for money. He should also outline prior commitments to the policy frameworks that will surround capital investment. Time and again money has been invested in expensive capital projects and then mismanaged subsequently.

It is time for the public sector and the Government to face up to real change. What we should have been presented with today was a decision to suspend the big pay increases and make them conditional on performance. We should have insisted that every public body should deliver independently audited efficiencies of at least 2% in 2008. We should also have initiated immediate audits in respect of all agencies. Such audits would have brought about the far-reaching rationalisation of those agencies. Why do we have a taxi regulator, an aviation regulator and a bus regulator? Why not a single transport regulator? Why do we have a health insurance regulator and a financial regulator? Why are the two not integrated?

The Government engages in too much easy thinking and takes too many soft options regarding the way it approaches its responsibilities.

131

We cannot afford the cosy practice the Minister, Deputy Cowen, has again adopted this year of allocating money and leaving all existing services intact. That was the purpose of the big book with which we were presented in October. Everything that is already in place will remain intact. The Government is only focused on how to spend the money that is left over. If we want radical change and reform, we must engage in a root and branch examination of what is happening in those programmes. We should not state that existing services will remain in place and that we will tack on a little more funding. It is the [131] latter which has brought us to the point at which we find ourselves, namely, facing into a huge deficit on the back of only a modest change in the way the economy is performing.

People might ask if the Minister is an iron chancellor. In my opinion, he is more like the tin man. When one seeks real achievements or real change, one realises that the Minister, Deputy Cowen, is hollow. He has no heart for real reform in respect of the way we deliver public services. He lives in a fantasy land of soundbites and he has substituted those soundbites for actual change that would make a difference. The time for the pampered indulgence of incompetent Ministers is over and the days of unwarranted pay increases, big bureaucracy, soft-option politics and loose spending are also at an end. Things must change.

The Government has forgotten what it is to survive in a small open economy. One must be alert, nimble and quick to change. There is a new generation in Ireland, the members of which are ambitious, energetic and creative. These people give their best and expect high standards elsewhere. They will not tolerate the sluggish, complacent and wasteful approach the Government continues to display. They have carried those opposite on their backs for too long. Today was the opportunity to show that the Government has the ambition and capacity to lead in terms of introducing change.

Leadership is not about talking gravely in solemn tones. It involves having intense, driving determination to achieve best practice in the context of what happens in the public service. Leadership also involves demonstrating that one can lead from the front and that one will not seek to protect one’s own comforts but will instead shoulder the load and demand the standards of oneself that one demands of others. In this most important test, the Government has failed. It is time to initiate the programme of reform to which I refer. Today, it was already seven years too late to do so. The Government has again failed to instigate change.

