I am pleased, as Minister of State at the Department of Health and Children with special responsibility for people with disabilities and mental health, to congratulate my colleague, the Minister for Finance, Deputy Cowen, on continuing the tradition which has built up over the years of providing funding each year in his budget for people with disabilities. The provision of this funding continues to support the national disability strategy launched in September 2004. This strategy reinforces equal participation in society for people with disabilities and provides for a framework of new supports for people with disabilities. The programme, with the enhancement of other key support services, are key factors in building the additional capacity required to ensure services best meet identified needs.

The strategy builds on a strong equality framework, which is reflected in a range of important legislation, and places the policy of mainstreaming public services for people with disabilities on a clear legal footing. Its main elements are the Disability Act 2005, the Education for Persons with Special Educational Needs Act 2004, sectoral plans published in 2006 by six Departments, the Citizens Information Act 2007 and the multiannual investment programme for disability support services for the period 2006 to 2009.

In launching the national disability strategy the Taoiseach announced the Government’s commitment to a multiannual investment for disability specific services over a five-year period. The Tánaiste and Minister for Finance, Deputy Brian Cowen, has consistently delivered the resources for people with disabilities since the launch of the strategy in 2004. The additional funding of €50 million provided in the 2008 budget is in line with the original multiannual commitment. The funding allocated in the budget is to meet the costs associated with a range of elements in the multiannual investment programme.

396

For each of the past three years, the investment programme funding has been used to create additional residential day and respite places for persons with a disability. We have been provided [396] with funding for 255 new residential places, 85 new respite places and 535 new day places in the intellectual disability and autism areas. In addition, the implementation of the plan to transfer persons with intellectual disability or autism from psychiatric hospitals and other inappropriate placements will continue to be progressed.

In regard to services for persons with physical or sensory disability we have provided funding for a further 80 new residential places and there are also resources for 250,000 extra hours of home support and personal assistance. The additional €50 million announced in the budget will continue to provide a baseline to considerably enhance the multidisciplinary support services for people with disabilities in line with the Government’s commitment to build capacity within the health services and to deliver on the various legislative provisions in the national disability strategy that I have just outlined.

Since 1997 the Government has had a clear and effective strategy on the planning and delivery of health funded services for people with disabilities. The Government, through the strategy and, in particular, the funding measures I have outlined, is building on the very significant additional investment that has already been made in these services. In all, additional funding, amounting to €851 million, revenue and capital, has been invested in health funded support services for people with disabilities since 1997. This funding has also allowed for the commencement of Part 2 of the Disability Act 2005 which, as Deputies are aware, is a key element of the national disability strategy.

Part 2 of the Disability Act 2005 was commenced on 1 June 2007 for children under the age of five. This gives people with disabilities an entitlement to an independent assessment of health and education needs and a service statement identifying the services to be delivered. A system of complaints and appeals has also been established. This is a welcome significant step towards enhancing the level of support available to persons with disabilities.

This is the first time that an independent assessment of need, conducted according to standards laid down by an independent agency, the Health Information and Quality Authority, will be available. The implementation of the Act will also give us an accurate picture of service provision and of areas for improvement across the system into the future, through the provision of an annual report to the Minister, which will outline information on service provision and unmet need.

The mental health service is underpinned by comprehensive policy frameworks outlined in A Vision for Change and Reach Out. Furthermore it is supported by legislative reforms in the Mental Health Act 2001 and has been allocated substantial additional funding in recent years.

397

[397] In 2008 we will reap the rewards of that additional investment. I am happy to report that the impact of increased funding in child and adolescent mental health services will be realised next year. The HSE is proceeding with the recruitment of eight child and adolescent multidisciplinary teams, two for Dublin mid-Leinster, two for Dublin north east, two for the south and two for the west. As an interim arrangement 18 additional beds will come on stream in 2008.

The HSE has informed me it will fast-track the appointment of staff to facilitate the commissioning of these additional beds so that, by the end of 2008, there will be 30 beds in place. This represents a significant increase and is a most welcome development for such a vulnerable group. Meanwhile the construction of two 20-bed units will get under way, one in Cork and one in Galway.

In light of the information available around suicide and self harm, it has been agreed with the National Office for Suicide Prevention that an interim target for a 10% reduction in suicide should be achieved by 2010. In addition, a 5% reduction in repeated self harm by the same year and a further 5% by 2016 is the target. I accept that these are ambitious targets but I assure the House that I am committed to doing my utmost to ensure that they are achieved. To do so we must build on the success of the initiatives already in place. This work is ongoing and will continue in the coming year.

In regard to my brief in the Department of Enterprise, Trade and Employment I am delighted to inform the House that in regard to the continuation of existing programmes and schemes to promote FÁS training and employment services for people with disabilities, which include specialist training provision, supported employment, wage subsidy schemes and disability support and awareness, a total budget of €77 million has been provided in 2008 for these purposes.

I thank my colleague the Tánaiste and Minister for Finance, Deputy Cowen, for his continued support for people with disabilities and mental health problems.