Deputy Durkan referred to jobs in Donegal. I must inform him that employment has never been as high in Donegal as it is at present. The workers who lost their jobs were re-skilled and they are now back in employment.

Deputy Crawford referred to agriculture. He has always talked a lot about dairying. He did not refer to dairying tonight because milk is doing a lot better than it has in recent years as a result of work done by the Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, Deputy Mary Coughlan. Deputy Crawford also referred to a motorway and the N2 and N3. I do not know how many times the Taoiseach needs to announce the amount of money being set aside for that motorway —£400 million — before the Deputy will realise that the money is there and waiting. As soon as the authorities and the NRA get things up and running that money can be spent. Even Ian Paisley, while on a visit to America last year, acknowledged the £400 million that has been allocated by the Irish Government. I do not know why Deputy Crawford is looking for more money for a motorway from Dublin. He is not up with the facts at all.

[767]Deputy Ring referred to builders. His party had a period in charge of finance. If this had continued there would be no jobs left in this country.

There would not be a job left in the country if the Deputy’s party got going.

Health and the pay increases in this area were mentioned. There would be nobody working in any sector if the Deputies’ party had its way. Let us consider current issues such as the cancer strategy, to which Fine Gael is opposed.

Let us go back and revisit Portlaoise.

The problems at Portlaoise began while Fine Gael was in Government, with Deputy Noonan as Minister for Health. The Deputies, who were on the back benches, got him to overturn his strategy. He was trying to do then what the current Minister, Deputy Harney, is trying to do now.

If the Fine Gael Deputies had any guts at all they would support the cancer strategy for the good of the patients.

Instead they are looking after their own backsides and the seats in their own areas.

It is time the Deputy took some responsibility for health rather than looking after his own seat, which is all he is doing.

The last few speakers failed to realise that we are supposed to be debating the budget. I do not think they knew what they were speaking on. Much has been said about the budget delivered by the Minister for Finance, Deputy Brian Cowen, last week.

Most of it was positive but we have had the usual claptrap from the negative quarters across the way. I find it amusing that the only argument some politicians could muster was that some of the measures should have been introduced before now. That makes for a pretty good budget.

The most talked about element of the budget was, rightly, stamp duty reform as most would agree with it. The Government took a brave step and I commend the Minister, Deputy Cowen, for doing this. We will reap the benefits of this measure over the next year. The slowdown in the housing market has begun, but it will level out again. Equally, the rise in mortgage interest relief will benefit many who have already invested in homes, thus easing the burden on those who are currently investing in our economy.

The environment was a hot topic in the budget, in which a range of measured planned for the coming year and the years ahead was introduced. Motor tax and VRT have been mentioned. Due to the changes in the VRT regime, many cars already in the Irish market will become much cheaper. I have been informed that a BMW 320 could be reduced in price by €8,200 as a result of these measures. This is a brave step by the Minister because it puts the onus on those producing the cars to build cars that produce fewer emissions. It is a smart measure which is typical of the other measures introduced in what is overall a smart budget.

On the matter of energy conservation research and carbon reduction measures, while some might feel that the planned VRT and motor tax measures are harsh, one must look beyond initial reactions. We owe it to our environment to introduce such measures based on CO2 emissions rather than engine size. Our children will thank us in years to come.

The changes in personal income tax affect all of us, including the increase in personal tax credits of €70 for single persons and €140 for married persons and the increase in PAYE tax credit of €70 per year. The home carer tax credit was also hiked by €130 per year, increasing it to €900.

The Deputies across the way are blind to some of the more positive figures. I could go on but I will finish by saying that I am very proud to be associated with the budget as delivered in the House last week by the Minister, Deputy Cowen. This forward-thinking Government continues to lay strong foundations for this country’s future. Our children will look back and thank us for the sensible measures introduced in the budget. History will prove that by the actions of this Government in its third term in office Ireland will be continue to be a proud example to other economies around the world.

