I recall the first time I had to go abroad as a Minister of State representing the country. I found it strange to have all this paraphernalia surrounding Ministers, where they had people carrying bags and doing all sorts of things as if some super personalities had arrived on the scene.

After ten years of that, the crowd over there have become so stale, so immune, so comfortable to the trappings of office that they have lost all reality with what they have done in this budget.

The Minister for Justice, Equality and Law and Reform is the only Minister that I know of who gave a clean bill of health to a public representative who was deemed guilty of taking corrupt payments. He is the last person to make a comment in this House on such issues.

Nobody has answered the fundamental question here. Two years ago, this country was €6 billion in surplus. It is now €15 billion in debt. I accept that there have been improvements in infrastructure and so on, but the people on that side of the House did not take into account the warning signs that were there for many years of what could happen if provision was not made for a crash that might follow a period of boom.

It is fair to say that the workers of Ireland built the Celtic tiger. It was built through exports, trade and manufacturing, but it got diverted down the road of property-based wealth, driven by Fianna Fáil in particular.

Yesterday’s budget has come against the background of a move from a €6 billion surplus to a €15 billion deficit in the space of two years. That is unprecedented anywhere in Europe. It was done because the Government allowed the competitiveness of the country to slip seriously over the last few years. We lost export share as we put all our hopes in the creation of wealth through the property bubble and ended up with the most exposed financial sector in Europe. The Taoiseach came into the House yesterday and had the Minister for Finance read out a Budget Statement that makes every person in the country pay for the Government’s mistakes and pay for its waste. There is nowhere anybody can turn now but they face down the barrel of some tax or other. The Taoiseach funked it yesterday when he had an opportunity to lay out his plans based on the OECD report or based on what he intended to do for public sector reform. This budget did not mention the detail of how that will be applied.

Yesterday’s budget was disgraceful in what it contained and it was deplorable in what it did not contain. The response it elicited was quite fascinating. Never before have I seen such a universal rejection of a budget. One by one the statements came out. Groups such as IBEC, ISME, ICTU, SIPTU, Aer Lingus, Ryanair, ASH, hospital personnel, the Irish Hotels Federation, Focus Ireland, Barnardos, all criticised this budget. Companies, trade unions and interest groups who have never before agreed, found themselves unified in universal and total rejection [744]of the budget. I could not believe that not one single agency, organisation, company or union had anything positive to say. Then late in the evening, just one positive and enthusiastic response appeared. One single, solitary organisation welcomed the budget and that was the Construction Industry Federation.

It is good to see that the Government is at least consistent. In good times and bad it keeps things constant; it may disappoint the nation, but it never disappoints the construction industry.

I also put forward the view that there should not be any cut in the capital programme and workers, tradespeople and craftsmen could be transferred from the collapsed residential housing sector into other areas of the construction industry such as schools, roads and other infrastructure projects. The problem is that the major party in Government, Fianna Fáil, has been in office for more than ten years. It has claimed credit on every occasion that the sun shone. However, the Government fell asleep in that comfort zone and became immune to the realities of what is happening on the street. It ignored the warning signs that were put up in flares for long enough on a range of issues. The Government has been too lazy, too stale, too arrogant, too out of touch with the pressured lives of the mortgaged poor.

Yesterday, the Minister for Finance, having already likened himself to the American President who dragged his nation out of a depression, went even further in his presumption, in his out of touch impertinence; he called for patriotism when the Government expects every person to pay for its wanton waste and its playing free and easy and reckless with the economy and the taxes of the people. Instead of spending the next few days spinning this disaster to the media, the Taoiseach should try meeting some of the people who are now impoverished, whose standard of living will drop, who are being punished. He should try telling these exhausted men and women about the patriotic action they are taking today in paying for the Government’s outrageous and reckless mistakes.

I can promise the Taoiseach if he does this, he will get a short, two-word answer from them. It is very easy for a Government that stopped listening to reality a long time ago to talk about patriotism. However, if it matches its high-flown words to the real world outside this House it will quickly find that brand of patriotism rejected with heavy losses. The people know how badly they have been served. They know the Taoiseach and the Government he struggles to lead have achieved the unbelievable; they have produced disaster out of success. They have turned a surplus of €6 billion into a €15 billion deficit. For the first time in the history of the State they have reversed progress and condemned hard working people and families to a lower living standard than their parents and in some cases, their grandparents enjoyed. The Government has reversed the standard of living and the quality of life for hundreds of thousands of families. That is some achievement by the Taoiseach and the Minister for Finance in a short time. They have switched this country from a position of surplus to massive deficit.

The Taoiseach shmoozed his way through the last four budgets, dispensing gifts of government expenditure to all and sundry, without any regard to the consequences. Everything was sound. Anybody who mentioned any difficulties with this economy was guilty of national sabotage and talking down our country. Last May, when the Taoiseach was still claiming that the fundamentals of the economy were sound, what planet was this Government living on? The Taoiseach was asked at the time to explain his economic rescue plan. He knew we were facing financial difficulties of the most serious type. There was no response from the Taoiseach. Yesterday’s budget did not reveal any plan. It is a series of tax levies and tax takes on every [745]taxpayer and worker. Yesterday’s budget fixed no fundamental problems and it ensured no future. It is without hope, without aspiration or without inspiration and it does not offer any enthusiasm to anybody with any initiative. It is a pick-and-mix punishment to a hardworking nation. One of the headlines in a newspaper today states: “All pain but no gain”. It is a desperate budget introduced by a desperate Government. This is panic, not policy; it is denial, not direction.

The Government has tried to hide its miserable performance behind the international banking crisis. Every time a television is turned on, the excuse is that it is America, Japan, China or Europe. People have become blurred with the trillions and billions and the economic statistics. We all know the difficulties that are so complex for so many countries as a result of the international banking and global situation. We know the Government did not cause this crisis and it is not responsible for the sub-prime sector in the United States which is another word for reckless spending but it is responsible for the reckless spending in this economy. The Taoiseach should not try to tell the House that the international global financial position is responsible for the costs associated with doing business here, for the fact the Government has never opened up competition, from Dublin Bus to the provision of broadband, to the provision of energy, to the regulation in all this area. The Government has allowed a situation to apply where it is now one of the costliest countries in the eurozone in which to do business, despite the references in the Taoiseach’s speech to easy setting up costs for companies. The Taoiseach has allowed a situation to come about where it is virtually impossible to do business, between regulation, cost and the beating down of small businesses. Before this time next year, there will be hundreds of retail outlets closed down because they cannot pay the commercial water charges, never mind meet the commercial rates being applied by local authorities. The answer from the Minister for the Environment, Heritage and Local Government has been to change the light bulbs and give people bicycles.

A total of 50,000 people joined the dole queues this year, the first year of the Taoiseach’s leadership and 100,000 more will join those dismal queues next year. The social welfare bill will rise by approximately €10,000 a month. Businesses the length and breadth of this country are fighting for survival and as the foreclosure figures this week proved many of them are not succeeding. Couples whose dream was to own their own home are now paying more for a home worth hundreds of thousands less than they paid for it and in many cases they were seduced into buying by a market controlled by profligate lending institutions. What did the Government do for these families and young people?

The Minister slapped a 1% levy on their shrinking incomes. He raised VAT rates and these will apply in every household. He increased the price of petrol so that last night lines of cars were drawn up outside every garage as hard-pressed workers tried to fill the tanks of their cars before that extra cost came in. The Minister raised their motor tax, cut what they could reclaim on their medical expenses and added €10 to every air flight they take. The 16 people who left my town for Australia would have paid that were they here today. The other young people leaving this country on the emigrant aeroplane to seek work in countries where it is available will be taxed for flying out of Ireland. The Minister hiked hospital charges to make it more difficult for people to bring their sick children to accident and emergency departments. He reduced their mortgage relief and the relief on money they are trying to put into their pensions. He slapped €300 extra on secondary school bus tickets and €600 on third [746]level registration fees and reduced child benefit on over 18s by 50%, which is despicable given that the mothers of Ireland in the main have raised their children to that point.

That is what the Minister did yesterday to middle income families. Everywhere they turn there is a tax or levy. They are faced with increased taxation by Fianna Fáil in government. This is a declaration of war on the middle classes. It is also a war on the future. The Minister has driven a stake through the heart of education. The Government went around the country last year holding public meetings where thousands of people turned up. To these meetings it sent Ministers’ representatives and letters, pledging to reduce class sizes because it believed in giving parents, teachers and children the best opportunity to provide for the future. The Government has driven a stake through that and its collapse of its commitment to decrease class sizes at a time of pressure like this is contradictory to what has just been said, that the Government wants to build a knowledge future with well qualified, confident young people who are able to stand on their own feet against their peers from around the world. That cannot be done with increasing class sizes and the withdrawal of teachers of English in classes where many students have no English, which Deputy Hanafin was forced to pledge when she was Minister for Education and Science. The Government has made it harder on middle-income and lower-income families and on children in the primary sector, who will struggle even more as they go through secondary school and up to when they must compete internationally.

The claims that the Government wants to build a knowledge economy are not worth the paper they are written on. They are like most other Fianna Fáil promises, broken promises. It was an election winner to say we wanted to become a knowledge economy. The Ministers should go around the country — as many of them do, or are driven around the country — and look at the lack of broadband and communications capacity to do business. They should examine the structure of IT facilities in schools and the reneging on the €252 million in the programme for Government that was to be spent on that. They should look at the divergence of capacity and skill level across the educational spectrum. If the Government bothered to look, it would see that we struggle and yesterday’s decision will make it even worse.

Yesterday, my colleague, Deputy Bruton, described the budget as hitting “any family and every family, any business and every business”. He is right, just as he was right in recent years when he highlighted the failure to manage soaring Government expenditure, the failure to reform the public sector when the need for reform was clear, the danger of building spending programmes on the back of temporary tax windfalls from an overheating property market and the failure to take hard decisions. Deputy Bruton pointed those out. Yesterday I read his critique of the 2002 budget. It is very similar to the present position, except this situation is even worse. Similar warnings came from the IMF, the OECD, the ESRI and the Central Bank. Anybody could have seen these warning signs. Ten years ago in County Clare a young economist, Mr. David McWilliams, predicted seven years of plenty followed by a period of bust when five principal elements would apply, such as breaking the growth and stability pact, the destruction of the housing sector and the collapse of the banks. The Government and the Taoiseach did nothing about it. The Taoiseach did laps of honour when his predecessor left and he was entitled to some lap of honour on taking up office. He took the ball from European business and his speech here about being at the heart of Europe is very far from Fianna Fáil’s effort in that campaign last summer.

[747]The result of yesterday’s efforts is that taxpayers are punch drunk. Everywhere they go they will have to pay. The Government is making every person pay for what has happened. This should have been stopped before now. The recent Comptroller and Auditor General’s report highlighted the ludicrous extent of waste in the HSE, the Department of Justice, Equality and Law Reform and a range of other Departments, but the Government did nothing about that. Yesterday’s response regarding the HSE and the public service is merely that there will be a redundancy programme.

The Government has parked decentralisation. We believe in well managed and planned decentralisation, but the plan to move 10,000 public servants to 53 locations within three years was turned into a shambles. The Government has made a list of places that are in limbo until 2011. It is funny that it should be 2011, a year before a general election. I suppose the Government will throw up that flare again and expect people to believe it, as on this occasion. Last week Deputy Mitchell asked questions on arts, sport and tourism. Two decentralised officials left Killarney at 7 a.m. to get here to assist the Minister to provide answers to Deputy Mitchell’s questions. The train to Mallow broke down, then the second train broke down. They were on mobile telephones and because of the lack of capacity they could not be heard in Dublin. It is the tale of the disappeared. They never arrived to provide solace and comfort to the Minister for Arts, Sport and Tourism who was here trying to answer pertinent questions from Deputy Mitchell last week.

That is what happens when one has an unplanned decentralised system. If Departments were decentralised all over the country when the banking crisis erupted, there would have been chaos. A number of years ago we pointed out how decentralisation should have been implemented. Where decentralisation was planned in Donegal, Tullamore and other places around the country it has worked very well. Parking it in limbo until 2011 is obviously a political ploy to reactivate it at some stage.

The simple measure of the Government’s performance yesterday is that we are demonstrably in a far worse position than any of our European neighbours. No country has been immune to the banking crisis, but when the international financial tsunami hit they were in a far better position to withstand it. No country has been as apathetic, lazy or smug in its response to this crisis. We saw what happened in Spain. In our recession, into which the Taoiseach has led us, yesterday’s budget offered no light at the end of the tunnel. People know they are poorer now. They are worse off in that they will have to pay more. In terms of taking the major decisions, the Government funked this. In the Government’s war on the middle classes an ordinary PAYE worker taking home €50,000 loses €1,000 of his or her income directly and then faces a series of extra costs and stealth charges, draining away that income, if he or she is lucky enough to be able to keep his or her job.

As the Taoiseach rightly pointed out, the people have endless courage and an unequalled capacity for work, but this morning they will read that the consequences of this budget will be a serious lowering of their standard of living. Many of them will be tipped into poverty. Nothing corrodes a family like poverty which is brought about by circumstances it cannot control. The new income levies are precisely that. They are crude in design and impact. In the past when we had major problems we levied the banks. Now that the banks have caused us enormous problems the Government has not levied them but slapped a levy on the mortgaged
poor.

[748]I note the Minister for Finance yesterday judiciously leaked the fact the Government intends to reduce wages in the banking sector, as a diversion to what is happening today. The spin machine is in full flight, particularly in the Department of Social and Family Affairs. We were told last July there would be no cutbacks in education, health or social welfare and that the poor and vulnerable would be protected. We know what the spin is but the reality is very different.

Pensioners who are to get an extra euro per day will see the value of that increase go down the tubes when their medical card is means tested. The Government does not seem to appreciate the mentality of elderly people who were awarded a medical card by the State. The Taoiseach has said that some of them will receive a €400 grant towards their medical expenses but the vast majority of such people have respiratory illnesses and will not use the €400 grant because they are afraid to go to the doctor in the first place. They will end up in hospital beds, which would not happen had they gone to their doctor in the first place.

The Government set up a system to award medical cards to all those over 70 and the recipients were comfortable with that. Had the Government said in the beginning that it intended to give medical cards to those over 70, subject to a particularly flexible means test, those who are well off and over 70 would have accepted that. Instead, the Government introduced a universal scheme, which those over 70 accepted and with which they were very comfortable. Many elderly people will not use a GP-visit card or the €400 grant because they are afraid to go to the doctor in the first place. They will get so ill that they will end up in hospital and on trolleys, as the Minister for Health and Children knows only too well. The Government’s actions in respect of these medical cards is deplorable and despicable.

This budget is all about taking back from diligent people who carry no responsibility for the disaster that this Government has failed to avert. There are cutbacks in medical care provision and increases in accident and emergency charges. The Taoiseach clarified the position this morning regarding nursing homes, raised by Deputy Michael Noonan yesterday, although we do not yet know the final shape of the fair deal legislation..

This nation faces a cut in direct front line services in education and increases in class sizes. Does anyone remember the promises made by the former Ministers for Education and Science, Deputies Micheál Martin and Noel Dempsey? It is a case of give a thing, take it back.

For families, this budget is a double-edged sword. The pain starts here and now but the real suffering will begin in six months’ time. If the Department of Finance has got its figures wrong, in terms of the international projections, then God help Ireland next year. The Government has fleeced us through taxes on petrol, travel, capital gains and so forth, with the prospect of more to come for every citizen next year.

The Department of Finance got all its figures wrong in recent years. It got all the figures wrong for this year and yet it can predict what the international situation will be next year and the year after. Fianna Fáil in Government has suddenly found the crystal ball and the path back to budgetary efficiency, a strong economy and competitiveness. It will achieve these by taxing every person to pay for its wanton mistakes and its fast and reckless use of taxpayers’ money.

The Government has distanced itself from its own responsibilities.

The Government set up the National Competitiveness Council and then ignored all of its reports and recommendations. It has mired businesses in red tape and regulation. I urge the Government to talk to shop owners and small business people. They are spending half a day a [749]week filling in forms for the Government and now they will have to do more. The employer of the 16 year old who works for a few hours on a Saturday in a sweet shop or a coffee shop will now have to fill in more forms for the Government to pay the 1% income levy. The same is true for all of those in the minimum wage sector.

The banking sector which in many ways was responsible for so much angst is now in a bizarre relationship with the Government. We do not yet know the extent of the bad debt or rolled up interest in that sector. I hope that when the Government publishes its scheme tomorrow, all of that detail will be made available so that we will know to what we are signing up.

This Government continues to take money out of the economy rather than getting better value for the money it spends. It commits us to massive borrowing each and every day, with more to follow next year, up to €13.5 billion. It is horrifyingly over-optimistic for next year. This budget is disastrous.

The so-called plans that were set out yesterday are not plans. There was no detail or forecast and no clear method for reforming the public sector spelled out. Some of the best people I have met in my life work in the public sector. The Government will make the taxpayer pay for many of them to become redundant because it says they should not have been employed in the first place. The former Minister for Finance, former Deputy Charlie McCreevy, increased current spending and the Government hired 30,000 more public servants, most of them in administration. The Government now tells the taxpayer that it plans to get rid of those staff because they should not have been employed in the first place but it provides no detail as to how this will be achieved. This process will drift and drift, as the Taoiseach knows.

The reality is that for an easy political ride, this Government mortgaged the country to the builders, developers and speculators. It created a new elite, which is now demanding that the taxpayer bails it out. The Minister for Finance has a name for this. It is called patriotism. The new definition of Fianna Fáil patriotism is war on the middle classes and businesses and a failure to protect the vulnerable. This is a disastrous budget, for which the Government will pay the price.
