I am glad to have an opportunity to make a few points on the budget introduced by the Minister for Finance on Tuesday. We were well conditioned in recent months by the Government telling us about the difficult conditions of the economy. A few moments ago, I heard the Minister of State, Deputy Kelleher, tell the House that the vulnerable, the old and the education sector would be protected.

[136]We were assured that because of the importance of education to our economy and the need for a well-educated workforce that few cutbacks would be made in the sector. How naive were those who believed this? We were also told prior to last year’s general election that there were no problems and that the good times would continue to roll.

I will concentrate on the serious effects on education following the announcements made in recent days. The devil is in the detail and there seems to be a new budget emerging each time we seek clarification. Class size has been an emotive issue for many years. Prior to last year’s general election, the present Government’s Fianna Fáil Members made solemn pledges in halls packed with parents throughout the country to reduce class sizes gradually over the next few years.

Not only have these promises been reneged on, but class sizes are increasing. We cannot even compete with eastern European countries who are in the early stages of development. How can we claim we have the best education system in the world if we have the largest class sizes in Europe? I will not spend too long discussing the reduced schools building programme because those from rural Ireland did not have to wait until the budget to realise this. In County Mayo thousands of children attend classes in either prefabs or rooms with Third World conditions with no prospect of getting a new or refurbished school building even though they have been waiting for more than ten years.

However, it is some of the smaller cutbacks in courses, subjects and critical posts that so far have gone unnoticed. These will have serious implications for the delivery of a top-class education system. Grant payments for physics, chemistry, home economics, the leaving certificate vocational programme and transition year are all being abolished. At national level these cutbacks amount to €5.35 million. While it may seem a small amount in the big picture, it is a vital amount to each school and teacher working in these areas. In recent times there has been much ado about encouraging students to take science subjects at post-primary level with moneys being allocated for roadshows and so forth. The budget cutbacks will make it difficult to deliver on this.

Obesity is a problem with younger generations. We need children to eat the right foods and stay active. Yet the vehicle which could have delivered that knowledge to students, the home economics grant for equipment, has been withdrawn. When I was teaching, we were told the chalk-and-talk era was coming to an end and there needed to be more emphasis on practical teaching. A good and well-resourced home economics course would be more than just a subject; it would prepare students for a healthy lifestyle. These courses could easily be delivered with less money but instead full cutbacks have been introduced.

Leaving certificate applied and transition year programmes are provided to encourage students to complete school programmes. In the process they become more mature and experience the workplace. Is there any joined-up thinking in cutting these back? On the one hand, the Government promotes certain ideals but then puts obstacles in the way of the cheapest and most successful delivery of them.

Under the budget, teacher substitution arrangements are not allowed even for school business absences in post-primary schools. The real truth of this cutback is that in-service courses are now withdrawn. Another hidden cutback in the latest information we have received is that home-school liaison officer posts will go in schools which lost their DEIS status prior to the [137]general election but were allowed to keep them when a furore was created at the time. Nine such schools will be affected in the Mayo constituency alone when these cuts are implemented. The officers provide not just an education but a social service. The officers can be the first to notice dysfunctional families, acting as a sort of early warning system in that respect.

The increase in the registration fees for students entering third level is the re-introduction of fees by the back door. Those parents forking out for these fees will already have been hit with the increased charges for transport, etc., at second level. The back to education grants were already restrictive in the case of young people who left school early to join the workforce in the now dead and gone Celtic tiger. Many of these young people are now unemployed with no prospect of a job. Many of them will have to wait six months before they can apply for the grant. On top of that, there are 500 fewer places available.

We all expected some pain in the budget but the least we could have expected was that it would be implemented with some equity. Under the travel tax proposal, €2 will levied on a journey less than 300 km and €10 for a journey over 300 km. A flight from Ireland West Airport Knock to Liverpool, Glasgow or Manchester will be taxed at €10 but a similar flight from Dublin Airport will be taxed only €2. Where is the equity in that? This is anti-competitive and anti-west.

This morning I was glad to hear the Minister for Finance, Deputy Brian Lenihan, say on radio that any anomalies in the medical card provisions will be ironed out. I presume the same will apply to the travel tax.

I heard the Minister speaking about this on “Morning Ireland”. The west has suffered long enough. If budgetary pain is to be imposed, it should be done so with some equity. The travel tax will affect all regional airports and it should be changed.

Earlier, I took a telephone call from a farmer in my constituency who was concerned about the reduction in the disadvantaged area grant. He stated his income for next year will be reduced by €2,500. Cutbacks are acceptable if they are fair and equitable. Many of those announced in Tuesday’s budget were not.

I thank the Leas-Cheann Comhairle for the opportunity to address a number of issues on a budget that obviously was rushed and so poorly thought-out that the old, the young and the farming community in particular have been forced to take to the streets to fight for their rights. The bringing forward of the budget by eight weeks was meant to demonstrate the Government was in control of significant problems in the economy and was willing and able to deal with them in a fair and equitable manner. What has emerged, rather, is a badly thought-out document, which uses as its prime target the most vulnerable, the elderly, students and farmers. As I already have spoken on the education issue, I wish to turn my attention to the cutbacks in the budget pertaining to farming.

The farming industry is a sector of the economy that has taken and survived many hits over the years. While manufacturing, construction and some service industries have come and gone, farming has managed to withstand more downturns than most. It has had its good days but these have been far outnumbered by the difficulties it has faced. Farmers have seen the prices they receive for their produce fall while the price paid by the consumer has rocketed in some cases. For example, earlier this year grain farmers were obliged to accept a large reduction in price for their barley from Diageo. Concurrently however, Diageo increased the price the same farmers were obliged to pay for a pint of Guinness for the third time within a brief period.

I wish to refer to a few of the savage cutbacks in the budget that, if implemented, will drive people from the land. If this is allowed to happen at this time, it will have far greater consequences than would have been the case a few years ago, when there were opportunities available in other sectors, such as the construction industry in particular, and young farmers had a choice. The only choice the proposed changes will leave them with is the emigrant aeroplane or ship.

First, the installation aid for young farmers, which was an incentive for the young population to get into farming, was axed. The €15,000 grant has been withdrawn just when it is most needed to provide a sustainable job. One often hears of the enormous cost of each job created in the manufacturing industry. Although such jobs now are announced only rarely, their cost far exceeds €15,000 per job. Earlier, I read a document in which the creation of every job by the IDA is estimated to cost approximately €60,000, which is far removed from the moneys needed for the installation aid.

Last week, I was visited in my clinic by a mother who last year convinced her son not to take up a job offer from Mayo County Council, in order that he might do the course to qualify for the green certificate and become a qualified farmer. Although he now has a green certificate, he is not entitled to installation aid because he had not completed all the documentation for his application and has no immediate prospect of a job outside farming. It has been suggested that this scheme merely has been suspended. However, even were the scheme to be restored, this would be of little use to the aforementioned young man who, being just within the allowable age limit at present, would be too old. Members have been told the average number of take-ups of this scheme is 800 per annum. The announcement of such a number of jobs in any other sector of the economy at present would be the cause of a national celebration. Members should remember the total cost to the Government was only €7 million, or €8,750 per young farmer, as the remainder of the cost was met by Europe.

The cuts in the disadvantaged area payment in the budget also will have detrimental effects on the smallest and weakest farmers. In my constituency of Mayo, farmers on the maximum 45 hectare limit will lose €1,300 per year. If that loss is added to the cutback in the suckler cow [845]welfare scheme, the average farmer in Mayo will be at a loss of a minimum of €2,500. This will cost the farmers of County Mayo alone millions of euro. The budget seems intent on shutting down farming as a career in rural Ireland. Fairness and equity were promised in the budget and a strong case exists for a reversal of some of the aforementioned measures, both to support young people to take up jobs that await them and in the interests of fairness, equity and economic sense.

I will conclude by noting I already have spoken about education cutbacks. I attended a meeting last week in Claremorris of 1,500 farmers at which the anger and dejection were palpable. One must not forget that not alone are farmers losing money in the aforementioned cutbacks, as mothers and fathers they will be obliged to fork out the additional hundreds of euro for school transport, school books and all the grant aid that has been taken from them in the education cutbacks. In addition, these are the same people who will be affected by the cuts in the health budget, the home care packages and so on. I will sum up the budget by asking the reason the vulnerable have been hit to such an extent.
