Over four reckless budgets the Minister for Finance’s predecessor dragged this economy to the very edge of a cliff. Today, with this budget, the Minister has pushed us over the edge. We were told this would be a budget about making provision for the future, but it is all about extra taxes for ordinary families, extra charges for people and cutting capital spending.

The truth is hard for the Deputies opposite to take. Today we see increases in income tax, capital gains tax, DIRT, VAT and motor tax. Every tax has been increased. This is not what the country needed. The capital programme has been axed by €1,300 million, which is a cut of 11%. This was a time when we needed investment for the long-term future. The Minister has made decisions today that will threaten to turn a recession into a depression. The savings the Minister has found have not been found in the big bureaucracies that have been built up in recent years.

They have been found in the small crumbs that trickle across the table to ordinary people who are struggling. They have seen higher charges for drug refunds, accident and emergency departments, and hospital admissions. Their medical cards have been means tested even at very low income levels. The Minister has hit those who are most vulnerable. People awaiting home care packages have felt the brunt of cuts before this budget was even thought of, but the Minister has now turned the screw even further. People talk about courageous decisions but this is not courage. Courage is about taking a brave road — taking decisions that may make one unpopular in the short term, but which build something for the future. These are not the decisions the Minister has made today.

[449]A Deputy:  Taxing children’s shoes.

He has taken the soft road. He is looking to tax any family, every family, any business, and every business. He is looking to make it tougher for people who are struggling to get by. There is no sign the Minister is aware of the pressure on people from fuels bills, the pressure on people who have lost their jobs. That is the tragedy about this budget.

We expected a budget that was courageous, and we would have supported that budget.

There was an alternative. We, and many outside this House, articulated an alternative. It was an alternative where the Minister did not go down the soft option of raising taxes. The Minister is raising €2 billion in taxes today. That is the reality. That is €2 billion out of the economy. That is making it tougher for people to get by. It is tougher for people to spend. The Minister has also cut the capital budget by €1.3 billion. That is reducing activity in the economy. Those are the decisions.

When one looks to his current spending budgets, the Minister is still pushing ahead. There is €2 billion extra on current spending, only a quarter of which is for social welfare. He has pushed ahead with extra pay in the public service right across the board.

There were alternatives. We and many outside this House offered alternatives, but the Minister has taken the soft road. He will not be forgiven for this budget.

Today we see the highest borrowing in this country for 22 years. We see the golden rule, of only borrowing for capital purposes, broken. Some 40% of the borrowing the Minister is planning to undertake will be spent on day to day spending, not on capital spending. The Minister is on course to double the national debt in less than four years. This will be the legacy of Deputy Brian Lenihan’s tenure in this post as Minister of Finance.

Let us be quite blunt. It is not the bankers in Zurich or the mortgage lenders in Detroit who have brought us to this sorry pass. It is a Government that was cocky enough to claim credit for the good times and is not man enough to recognise its huge contribution to creating the property bubble and creating the difficulties that have plunged this economy into recession.

For four years the Taoiseach, then Minister for Finance, had the opportunity to show courage, to embrace reform in the public service, to ensure that the public money we spent made a difference to people at the front line, and he refused to make that courageous decision. He sat on his hands. He allowed spending increase with no reform. That is what we are paying for today. That is why people are seeing borrowing at historic levels, huge increases in taxation and the most vulnerable being asked to chip in more. That will not be forgiven either.

It is a tragedy that, once again, a new generation is asked to mortgage its future to pay for the mistakes that Fianna Fáil has made in Government. The culture of the Galway tent, the culture of spending when you have it is what has got us into this hole. It has damaged the fundamentals of our economy and we will pay for it in the years ahead.

Our problems today do not come from international difficulties. They come from a Government that has sabotaged the capacity of this economy to withstand that storm which was inevit[450]able. Why is the mighty Celtic cruiser the first to hit the rocks in this recession, the first to see its public finances run into difficulties? It is because the captain and the officers, who were on the deck and who we expected to look out for our interests, ignored the storm warnings, overloaded the vessel and neglected to maintain the engine, and now we are drifting towards the rocks.

The reason is clear. It is the way in which the Government pumped up public spending on the back of unsustainable revenues. It is the way they allowed the property bubble to destroy our strong exporting economy. It is the way they abandoned hard-learned habits of preventing waste in public spending. That is why we are in this predicament. It has nothing to do with the international factors.

Even today, with everything obvious out there, the Government remains in denial about the underlying causes of the difficulties that we face. While other countries have felt the force of the international shock waves, it is not they who are deep in recession. It is not they who find their public finances turned upside down. It is only Ireland that has seen that. Where other governments, like the Spanish, in particular, took the courageous decisions to make changes, the Minister sat on his hands.

Already we see the human casualties that have come from the Government’s approach to managing the economy and to failing to prepare. More than 80,000 people are already in the dole line, terrified for their future. There are thousands of talented businesses turning to loyal workers telling them they must let them go, and they are fearful that soon they will have to shut the doors and call in the receiver. There are hundreds of thousands of families struggling to pay mortgages on houses which will never see the value again that they paid for them, and they are sick with worry that it is their job that will be the next to go. There are old people looking on today at the closure of hospital beds and the freezing of home-care packages, frightened that the services they need will not be there when they turn to look for them.

The ultimate test of this budget is whether it has looked out for those families. Has it avoided the soft options? Has it protected the most vulnerable? Has it made major structural changes in the public sector that will avoid waste? Is it part of a wider plan to create a smarter economy? The sad answer to all of those questions is “No”.

Let us remember the context against which this budget has come. Since 2000, the Government increased current public spending by 140% or €32 billion —€20,000 extra for every family in the country. They increased the numbers in the public service by 72,000, but they delivered little or none of the commitments they made to improve the quality of public services.

They grew careless about how they spent money because they never really had to confront the taxpayer with the bill. The explosion in tax revenues from the property boom filled the gap and they went on blissfully unaware of the reality of the wasteful spending they incurred.

This bonanza in spending was not costless. Someone did pay. It was financed on the backs of hundreds of thousands of people who entered into 35-year mortgages and who now are struggling to pay that money. They are carrying the can. Young people have carried the can for Government waste. These miraculous revenues that were flowing in were not from some goose laying the golden egg. These were from real families who are now faced with the reality of a Government that did not manage the economy prudently. They are the ones whose backsides are exposed now, who are facing the real dangers and the cold winds of this economy.

Like the bankers so rightly now in the dock, this Government built long-term commitments on short-term revenues. They threw caution to the four winds. They put their self-interest [451]ahead of their responsibilities. The banks bailed out the developers. The Government bailed out the banks. Now the taxpayer is being asked to bail out the Government. Who will bail out the taxpayer, that is what I want to know?

Today, again, the Government found the soft options irresistible. Tax increases will crucify people on very modest incomes. That is the tragedy of today.

We will see the equivalent of a new 1% levy, both on the standard rate and on the top rate. It will apply to everyone. Even those exempt from tax will pay it. This applies right across the board. It is three tax increases rolled into one. It is a direct hit on those at work with no allowance for the commitments they might have to family and to mortgage. This is completely turning on its head equity in the tax code.

It is a temporary measure. Income tax was a temporary measure, I think, during the Boer War when it was introduced. The insurance levy was a temporary measure when it came in 25 years ago, and it is still there. I have little confidence that this is a temporary measure.

Today we see no increase in tax credits, the small payments that give a little relief to the people at the bottom. There is no increase, not even for the personal credit, not for the home carer credit, not for the disabled child credit, not for the age exemption credit. None of these people has got a cent in the budget’s concessions.

Even on indexation of the bands, the Minister offered only a little over half of indexation. This means that every person in the country will have to face paying €292 more than they should had their taxes and bands been indexed. That is the case for single people; it is double that for couples.

The Minister is hitting ordinary people at their most vulnerable times. He has decided to haul back the relief for people who have large medical expenses. These are the people in nursing homes or people who have expensive illnesses. They are being told they will no longer get relief at their marginal tax rate.

Again, this will hit families who are vulnerable. I have carried out a simple calculation of how this budget affects families on €60,000 per annum. God knows, that is not a great deal of money and those families will be eligible for affordable housing if the Minister’s plan goes ahead. These are very ordinary families struggling to get by, but today’s budget amounts to €2,300 in extra taxes, charges and levies on those families. That is the reality the Minister is presenting. These families are trying to cope with child care and the difficulties of living in straitened times.

We were told the Minister would be prudent in how he would invest scarce moneys. Why did he remove €2.2 billion from the public capital programme? He knocked over €1 billion from the State’s contribution and €1 billion from the PPPs, which is a total of €2 billion. That is inexplicable when one recalls the Minister saying, time and again, that the one thing the Government would protect was its investment in the capital programme. Why has the Minister sacrificed €2 billion of it? That appears totally perverse at this difficult time.

[452]The problem in this country is that there is a collapse of confidence in these Ministers to deliver value for money in the public service. That is the legacy of this Government. The annual catalogue of waste in the reports of the Comptroller and Auditor General has produced no more than an indifferent shrug from the Government. There is no resolve to change. Deplorable decisions have got us into this hole. Whether it was benchmarking, the birth of the HSE and how it was handled or the crass political handling of decentralisation, Ministers have failed time and again. They failed to lead change in the public service because they do not work to professional standards themselves. They are the first to break the rules when they wish to push through a pet project and they are the last to accept responsibility when something goes wrong.

How can these Ministers be taken seriously? Not one of them produced their statement of strategy on time, even though it is their legal obligation. They do not bother to measure three quarters of the tasks they regard as priorities when producing the annual output statements. Even last year, they only delivered a fraction of the commitments they undertook to deliver with the money we gave them. These are not Ministers one can take seriously. One will search in vain for radical reform in public service delivery in this budget. We were told by Deputy Cowen when he assumed the position of Taoiseach that public service reform would be the hallmark of his regime. It did not happen in the four years when he was in charge of the public service but that was to change. However, there is no change today.

There has been no change in the way budgets are put together. Budgets are still dished out without Ministers being tied to any hard and fast performance targets. Evaluations of major projects are still not published, even though taxpayers are expected to stump up the money for them. We still have agencies that are not paid on a performance basis. What is the result? We see it daily. It means that when the HSE runs out of money it closes down beds, instead of looking for more patients to come through so that money would be attached to those patients. It simply closes down the beds and tells patients it has nothing for them.

That is a ridiculous system but the Minister persists with it. We have not seen in this budget the commitment to reform that is necessary. The budget should have been a watershed and should have provided for real changes, whereby managers were held responsible, power was devolved, change was implemented and people were expected to reach high standards. This was the opportunity to do it but, again, it has been fluffed.

The vulnerable deserved a lot better than what they got today. Even before today’s budget was produced, the Government did not spare the most vulnerable in our community. When the HSE’s budget was running short during the summer it targeted the disabled and the old. Programme improvements for them were withdrawn so the HSE could limp on unreformed. When savings were required in July, where did the hand go? It went for overseas development aid and the money that had been assigned for nursing homes. It was all clawed back. Again, it was the soft option of hitting people who are weak.

Today we see more of it. The accident and emergency service charge is increased by 51%, the hospital charge by 14%, the drugs refund charge by 11% and the long-stay charge by
26%. Who will these charges hit other than the people in our community who are sick and vulnerable? However, these people only received a €7 increase in their social welfare payment. That is not even indexation, it is 3% when inflation is running at 4.5%. Their annual income has been cut in real terms and they are also being asked to stump up all these extra charges when they use these services. I do not know who was with the Minister when he set the increase [453]for the fuel allowance. It is just €2 extra per week at a time when fuel prices have gone through the roof. Older people who are dependent on poor fuel systems will suffer through this winter but there has been no consideration of their needs.

There was also little consciousness of the 200,000 people who are at risk of losing their jobs under the new regime. Where was the reform of the redundancy scheme to provide for immediate re-training or reform of the back to education scheme so people will not have to wait years before they get a chance to re-skill? Where is the reform in the family income supplement to target it at people who really need it? There has been no attempt to innovate, to think our way through or to create opportunities for people who are losing their jobs. That is not good enough. This budget has not been about innovation, change, hunting down waste and finding ways to help people who are vulnerable. Instead, the soft option is always chosen. That is the tragedy we are confronted with today.

In the longer term our success depends on being a successful trading economy. The gravest policy mistake in recent years by the Government has been to forget that this country stands or falls by its ability to export. That is a tragedy, which will make it very difficult for us to pull through and recover from these difficult times. There is nothing in today’s budget that sets out the new programme for reform in the public sector organisations that hold that back. Let us be honest. Ireland is bottom of the league in terms of ports, airports, electricity costs, waste management costs and broadband. Where is the innovation or the commitment to reform these to give our exporters a chance?

It is worth recalling the contrast between the past four years and the years when the rainbow Government was in power, when Deputy Ruairí Quinn was Minister for Finance and I was Minister for Enterprise and Employment. At that time the volume of exports was growing at 17%; now it has collapsed to just 6%. Under that Government, productivity was growing at 8% per annum; now it has collapsed to just 2%. Then, our market share increased by 25% in four years; this Government has cut it by 20% in four years. That is something a small open economy cannot tolerate and survive and thrive. That must change, but the start on that vital change was not made today.

As a people, we have taken great pride in the creation of a new Ireland in the past two or three decades. Families separated by emigration were reunited, young people leaving school were able to find good jobs in this country and towns and villages in danger of fading away returned to life. We grew anxious in recent years when the pressures of working in an economy of runaway house prices, jumbo mortgages, poor transport and expensive child care gradually choked the quality of many people’s lives. However, people kept going and put their trust in Fianna Fáil, which promised it had everything under control. Fianna Fáil said it had a strategy for health care, school buildings and smaller class sizes, which is now gone. It had a strategy for spatial planning and climate change and it believed the property sector was based on sound economic fundamentals. Those plans and strategies have all proven to be hollow shells. When tested, they cracked and yielded little inside. We now know the trust in Fianna Fáil was misplaced. It was asleep at the wheel and had grown lazy and lethargic and increasingly incompetent. The Fianna Fáil economic miracle has turned into a mirage. The complacent Fianna Fáil message that it should be trusted on the grounds that it knows what it is doing is simply no longer holding up.

Even today, with a crisis on its doorstep, the Government has failed to grasp the profound changes that have affected our economic health and the far-reaching reforms that are called for. It has made a bad situation worse. The ordinary people will pay for its mistakes, not just today, which is clear, but in the future.
