In spite of all the spin in recent weeks about protecting the vulnerable — we heard a great deal about this today — the budget is a blatant attempt to ensure that ordinary working people will bear the brunt of clearing up the mess the Government has made of the economy.

The comments of the Minister for Finance yesterday to the effect that people should pull together and play their part according to their means are cynical in the extreme. The hallmark of the economic boom of recent years has been inequality. The past decade has seen most families working very hard just to survive. Welfare recipients were just about keeping their heads above water while the elite and high rollers were facilitated in making millions of euro hand over fist. These were the developers and landowners, bankers, financial institutions, auctioneers and professionals associated with buying and selling houses and lending money to people who could not afford to borrow it in many circumstances. I refer to all those vested interests who are so close to Fianna Fáil and who, when the going got tough, have been so well protected by that party. In many ways, this is the real legacy of the former Taoiseach Bertie [801]Ahern and the former Minister, Charlie McCreevy. This structural inequality is so deep-rooted that the junior partners in Government are either closing their eyes to its existence or have become so used to it they are not seeing it for what it is.

The people who are protected in this budget, far from being the vulnerable, are those who have always been the friends of Fianna Fáil and who have always done well out of budgets. Over the past ten years, it has always been the rich who have got the lion’s share in budgets. This is exactly what occurred yesterday. I refer to special protection, which has facilitated the creation of so many millionaires, through ensuring there is as little Government interference as possible, with the lightest kind of regulation possible and the lightest demands possible in terms of taxation. That culture continues very clearly in the current budget.

Far from everyone playing their part, the budget targets those on low and average incomes and scandalously expects them to bail out the Government. Yet again, the rich, who have done so well out of the boom, are getting away with it when it comes to contributing to the recovery. The Minister, Deputy Brian Lenihan, has a downright cheek to call ordinary people to patriotic action while he allows the rich to avoid all responsibility. What about those high rollers showing some patriotism for a change? Yet again, they have got away with it.

The Government had many options available in regard to how it would balance the budget. The fair thing would have been to ensure that those who could afford it most and who have done so well in the good times would contribute the lion’s share. The Taoiseach claimed this morning that the Government had no choice but to do what it did. This is clearly untrue. The Government had choices about where the axe would fall and it chose to spare the rich and instead inflict the cuts and pain on ordinary people. Why should anybody be patriotic in the face of blatant unfairness and inequality? Why did the Minister not seek patriotism from the very people who contributed to the economy’s difficulties and who could afford to make sacrifices?

There are many areas where significant savings could have been made which would not have hurt the poor, if only there was the political will to do so, and my party leader, Deputy Eamon Gilmore, has already referred to a number of these. Lies are being peddled by Government representatives who say we had no choice but to do what we had to do because we had to balance the books. There were clear choices for the Government but it opted to let better-off people off the hook in respect of their responsibilities and instead targeted those who can least afford to make the sacrifice.

I wish to highlight a few of the areas where the Minister, Deputy Gormley, and his colleagues could have directed their attention in preparation for this budget. For example, they could have decided to do something about the high level of mortgage interest tax relief for landlords, which currently stands at over €500 million. While these people have done very well, have a steady income and in some cases own umpteen properties, the Government, through its policies, has decided to continue to facilitate them to become even better off. Although the economy is in difficulty, it has been decided to leave landlords alone, as untouchables in regard to tax, and to allow them tax breaks of over €500 million a year.

Contrast that with the treatment of people at the lower end of the scale — those in part-time jobs, in community employment or on training schemes — who the Government will now tax. Almost 800,000 people who are currently outside the tax net will be brought into it while landlords are left outside with their perks.

Another example of what the Government could have done is to have abolished tax relief for super private clinics. If this had been done, €1 billion would have been saved, which would [802]have removed the burden from people on welfare and low incomes, who the Government sacrificed through its actions yesterday.

The Government could have done something about the extraordinary pension situation where extraordinarily generous tax reliefs are provided for those who have their own pension schemes. I am not talking about ordinary workers on ordinary incomes but, again, about the high rollers and those who have self-administered schemes, who are facilitated in putting together funds of over €5.5 million. The high rollers are the untouchables when it comes to pensions.

I acknowledge the Government made some move with regard to other pension products by putting a cap on the level of tax relief allowed for PRSAs and RACs. However, why did the Minister not go further? He could have reduced that cap to a level of €100,000 so people with earnings of up to that amount, who are doing reasonably okay, could continue to make pension contributions. However, there is no justification on any grounds for the State to subsidise people earning in excess of €100,000 in their pension contributions. If the Government had done this, if it had been bold in its decisions and if it had decided to be fair in the budget, it could have raised an extra €287 million from that measure alone.

There are of course other areas. For example, the Minister could have decided to close the loophole that allows developers to avoid stamp duty on commercial property. This would have brought in another €250 million if the Government had the courage to do it and if it was driven by the principle of fairness. Unfortunately, this was not the way chosen. Clearly, the Government shied away from the difficult choices it should have made. Instead of boasting about being brave and not shying away from choices, it absolutely shied away from the choices facing it. It could have decided to target those who were better off, who have done very well in recent years and who could well afford to make sacrifices. Instead, those people were left to their own devices. The Government decided that those who have done very well, the rich, would become the untouchables and instead it took the soft option of targeting those on average incomes and on welfare.

I want to comment about the appearance of the Minister, Deputy Eamon Ryan, on the news last night. I could not believe it when I listened to his comments on the budget. In that self-satisfied manner and style he has cultivated over the past year or so, he told people he was actually proud of this budget because it had protected welfare, education and health. The Minister needs to wake up and see what is going on. I do not know whether he is too busy pursuing his own agenda to see what other people have had to contend with in terms of the provisions of this budget but he clearly does not understand the extent of the cuts that have been introduced.

For example, the social welfare budget is approximately €1.5 billion more than the projected outturn for the current year. However, when one considers the likely significant increase in the number of claims from those being made unemployed or redundant, and all of the additional payments for the back to school allowance, MABS and the other extras which will undoubtedly arise, far from there being an 8.3% increase in the social welfare budget, the real increase in the Department’s budget is less than 5%. In real terms, this breaks down into increases of between 3% and 3.3%. In the context where there is a current projected rate of inflation of 4.3%, far from welfare recipients making any progress, they will not even stand still. In real terms, they will be worse off next year than they are this year. By any standards, that does not represent protection for those dependent on social welfare.

Equally, I would tell the Minister, Deputy Eamon Ryan, to wake up and see what is happening with regard to health, where there is the loss of the automatic entitlement to the medical [803]card for those over 70, increased accident and emergency charges, the halving of tax relief on medical expenses, increases in hospital charges and long-stay charges and an increase in the threshold for the drugs refund scheme. All of these measures will impose huge hardship on people on low incomes who have health problems. There are many people in that category and they are the ones who will bear the brunt of the cuts announced in the budget.

The same is true in regard to education. What has happened on the education front is shameful. At a time when we should recognise the importance of education and ensure people continue to receive good quality education so that we strive to reach European standards, the Minister has decided to increase the pupil-teacher ratio. That is an extraordinary decision. In the light of the campaigns that ran last year in that regard I hope the INTO will now give Fianna Fáil its answer.

Funding has been reduced to primary and secondary schools that are already struggling just to pay electricity and cleaning bills. School transport costs are up. Registration fees are up by €600. On that front also I refer to the abolition of child benefit for 18 year old students because that will have a huge impact in terms of education. I do not know if Ministers understand that some teenagers struggle to stay on in school because their families are poor. The withdrawal of child benefit from 18 year old students who are in school would put enormous pressure on them at a time when they are already finding it difficult. It is criminal to abolish child benefit for people in those circumstances. We will reap the rewards of that downstream in terms of a higher level of school drop out.

The changes in the budget have all the hallmarks of a Minister for Social and Family Affairs who has little interest in her portfolio and who cares even less. Let us examine some of the things that are happening. The introduction of the new employment levy means a pensioner with an occupational pension will be taxed on the part of his or her income that does not come from social welfare. A pensioner with an income from an occupational pension of €10,000 will have to pay €100 in tax. That claws back €100 of the extra €7 per week from his or her State pension. The income of such pensioners will rise by a mere 1.2%. That will go nowhere in terms of keeping abreast of the increases in the cost of living.

A lone parent receiving a one-parent family payment and rent supplement who has a part-time job earning €70 per week will lose from the budget. While such a person will gain €6.50 per week on his or her welfare payment, €2 per week for one child and a possible €2 on fuel allowance, he or she will have to hand back immediately €5 in extra contributions to her rent supplement. Out of a welfare increase of €6.50 there is an immediate clawback leaving a net increase of €1.50. That is shameful. The overall increase for such a person is 1.5%, which is nowhere near what is needed to keep pace with the cost of living. Things get worse for lone parents with dependants aged over 18. The measures announced to compensate for the loss of child benefit will not go anywhere near compensating such a person. If one does the sums on that, one will see that those people, undoubtedly, will be worse off.

Much of the detail of the budget did not come out yesterday. One had to read the small print. Having gone through the Budget Statement, the Labour Party has identified 30 new charges, stealth taxes, cuts and reductions in services that were included in the budget, which were largely kept hidden away in the small print. We have called those the treacherous 30. Those 30 treacherous cuts, individually and cumulatively, will have an extraordinarily negative impact on ordinary working families, people on average incomes and those dependent on welfare. Those cuts are a shameful indictment of the kind of inequality pursued by the Government over many years and which continue in these hard times. All of the cuts were specifically [804]chosen by the Government to balance the budget. They are cuts that specifically target ordinary people. They represent an extraordinary betrayal of trust and an abandonment of the weakest. Far from protecting the vulnerable they force the vulnerable and those on average incomes to carry the can and bear the brunt of the mistakes made by the Government to bail it out while the rich get away with paying little in terms of contributing to sorting out the current mess. By any standards this is a shameful budget and members of the Government should be ashamed of it.
