The Department of Community, Rural and Gaeltacht Affairs has always been focused on helping disadvantaged people by supporting communities throughout the country. This disadvantage, whether in urban or rural areas, can come in a range of forms from social exclusion to communities damaged by drugs problems.

I remain committed to the local development social inclusion programme and the community development programme and to the communities they serve. The range of social inclusion programmes, including the local development social inclusion and the community development programme have made a considerable contribution to the tasks of countering disadvantage and in promoting equality and social and economic inclusion.

The high numbers of communities and individuals supported by the programmes since their inception is the result of the hard work, commitment and co-operation not only of the personnel of partnerships but of the boards of partnerships and the boards of the community development projects and their inclusive representation in many cases from the State, social partners, elected representatives and, perhaps most important of all, the community sector. The key to the success of many social inclusion programmes is due in no small part to the input and commitment from individuals and community groups from all over the country.

Active citizenship is the key to success with each resident considering what he or she can do to bring about the changes needed to access opportunities and to enhance community life. This is at the core of the principle underpinning all social inclusion programmes and initiatives. Community and voluntary activity is at the centre of a vibrant and inclusive society and the [850]Government recognizes the invaluable role it plays. The Government is committed to the principles underpinning the relationship between the State and the sector as set out in the White Paper on supporting voluntary activity, as well as taking on board the work of the task force on active citizenship. By building on our experience of community consultation and participation, we can continue to improve the delivery of necessary supports to local communities.

However, in a vastly altered and ever-changing economic and social environment, the concept and reality of “community” are not what they were when this and other programmes started out. Our society, our family unit and by extension, our communities are now much more diverse. Programmes such as this, need to adapt to this new diversity and to new and emerging trends in as full and inclusive a way as possible. In the current economic environment, there is an ongoing need to ensure that resources are directed in a targeted and effective manner and that we constantly subject our activities to critical appraisal. In this way we can continue to ensure that those we work to assist will receive the maximum benefit.

I pay a special tribute to the countless volunteer members of local boards of management of community projects. Often working with limited resources, they put in many hours of voluntary effort for the good of the people in their neighbourhoods. We need to cherish the values that inform and drive those who have taken upon themselves the responsibility for the development of their community, their locality, and the promotion of social inclusion. We are entering a difficult period, but with prudent management of our scarce resources, I look forward with confidence to the further successes that the local and community development programmes will bring over the next year.

There will be continued support for the elderly through the community support to older people scheme. This scheme has been successful in supporting community groups to provide essential security items for older people living at home. Funds are made available for socially monitored alarms; smoke alarms; door and window security; emergency external lighting and a range of other personal security equipment. Last week, I was in Kerry where Muintir na Tíre held a community awareness week. I was asked about the scheme and I stated the scheme of grants in place would remain in place. It could easily have been withdrawn but I have seen its benefits first hand.

I have increased the provision to €3.5 million for 2009 in line with the level of demand evident in recent years. This scheme is modest in the overall context of the budget and even in the context of the broad range of funding provided for the community and voluntary sector. However, it is one area that clearly delivers front line services to those older people in our urban and rural communities most in need of reassurances and protection in their homes.

My Department, through its funding to voluntary and community groups, also supports a growing variety of opportunities for citizens to get involved in a task or organisation that appeals to them. Yesterday, I had a very useful discussion in the Seanad on the role of volunteering in Ireland. During this discussion, the immense contribution of volunteers to society was highlighted on all sides of the House.

I recently attended a number of “Give It A Swirl Day” events, an initiative promoted by Volunteer Centres Ireland through its members around the country, and it is a great example of an innovative approach to encouraging people of all ages and from all walks of life, individuals, families, community groups and businesses, to get involved for just a few hours, in a hands-on volunteer project in their local community. The events held throughout the country include activities such as community clean-ups, tree planting, decorating homes for the elderly and painting murals. Other initiatives assist sporting organisations like the GAA to develop [851]opportunities for volunteers in local clubs and to engage with other voluntary groups to achieve wider community objectives.

This network of volunteer centres across the country is funded by my Department and now provides annual funding of approximately €2.5 million to 20 such centres located throughout the country. So far this year, these volunteer centres have registered more than 5,660 volunteers and more than 800 volunteer-involving organisations. It should also be noted that 56% of registered volunteers had never volunteered before and 70% are aged 35 years and under. We often roll out new initiatives and let them off. However, we took the view in the Department that this initiative needs to be critically monitored and evaluated from an early stage to achieve best practice, high standards and the roll-out of volunteer centres on a national basis.

I am aware that in the current economic climate difficult decisions need to be made and compromise is required. However, this does not signal in any way an end to progress in the implementation of the national drugs strategy. Rather, it means that all involved will have to continue to build on the progress made to date and be innovative in our response to the ever-changing patterns of drug misuse.

The partnership approach, which underpins the strategy, involves statutory agencies working together with the community and voluntary sectors to combat the problems associated with substance misuse in our communities. Collaboration, a key element in our achievements so far, has made a significant contribution to the roll-out and effective running of drugs programmes. I am confident that together we can continue to build on these achievements.

Investment is set to continue and over €61 million has been allocated in the Department’s Vote for 2009. However, this represents only part of an overall allocation of over €200 million, provided by the Government across several Departments and agencies, to tackle the drugs problem this year. As I keep pointing out, tackling drug misuse requires a multi-agency, partnership approach and we must not lose sight of this with the publication of the 2009 Estimates. The Department of Community, Rural and Gaeltacht Affairs does not work in isolation and the Government is continuing to invest in the drugs strategy across the relevant Departments and agencies.

Funding from my Department is provided annually for the projects operating in the local and regional drugs taskforce areas under their respective plans, including those under the emerging needs fund. Funding will continue in 2009 for projects targeting services for particular communities and areas of need ranging from treatment, rehabilitation and prevention to supply reduction, education and research. In 2009, funding will also continue to be targeted at initiatives introduced in 2008. This will cover new responses to cocaine misuse across the taskforce areas. It will also cover measures to strengthen and deepen existing cocaine specific projects, as well as others aimed at polydrug-cocaine use in taskforce areas. Cocaine remains a significant problem that touches all levels of society but has a disproportionate effect on areas of disadvantage. I am delighted, therefore, that my Department is investing in this initiative.

I am also making funding available in 2009 under the rehabilitation initiative introduced in 2008. This measure, which is also taskforce led, will assist recovering drug misusers to regain their capacity for daily life, allowing them to reintegrate into their families and communities and begin to lead more meaningful lives again. It also represents a step towards the implementation of the recommendations in the report of the working group on drugs rehabilitation, published last year. It made a series of recommendations for the development of a comprehensive rehabilitation pillar under the drugs strategy.

The Health Service Executive will take the lead role in the implementation of these recommendations. A national drugs rehabilitation implementation committee is in the process of being put in place to dovetail with the appointment by the Health Service Executive of a senior [852]rehabilitation co-ordinator who will chair it. The first meeting of the committee will be held on 6 November. It is envisaged the working group recommendations will be implemented over several years, depending in part on the funding available.

With regard to the young people’s facilities and services fund, my Department is progressing arrangements to transfer the functions and duties relating to the fund to the Office of the Minister for Children and Youth Affairs. The fund’s integration into that office will provide a cohesive and comprehensive response to the needs of all young people, including those at risk of drug misuse.

My Department has also addressed the needs of young people in the areas not covered by the young people’s facilities and services fund. Under the regional youth initiative, capital funding of over €2 million will be provided for the development of 16 dedicated youth facilities where the young people’s facilities and services fund does not operate.

My Department has also made provision in 2009 for the valuable work of the national advisory committee on drugs, the research arm of the drugs strategy. I expect to continue to provide a grant to support the work of the national drug documentation centre which operates under the aegis of the alcohol and drug research unit of the Health Research Board.

The period covered by the current national drugs strategy comes to a close at the end of this year. My Department, aided by a steering group made up of representatives of the various interested parties, is working on the development of the new strategy for 2009 to 2016. It is vital to get the new strategy right and to have relevant targets, demanding but achievable, with the optimum structures in place to facilitate their implementation.

While I am aware of the current economic climate, I intend to strive to ensure that as many as possible of the concerns voiced during the comprehensive consultation process undertaken by my Department, particularly at the 15 public meetings held around the country, are taken on board. I will also be placing great emphasis on ensuring that addressing the problem of substance misuse remains a priority for all key Departments and agencies involved in the delivery of the new strategy, which I hope to launch in early 2009.

While recognising that reduced funding is available to my Department, it is my objective to ensure maximum funding is directed to frontline services. To achieve this, my Department will not be entering into new contracts to provide support services to community development projects. These supports will now be provided directly by staff in my Department. Further efficiencies will be achieved by reducing our Department’s dependence on the use of outside agencies. Specifically some work being carried out by Pobal on behalf of the Department will revert to the Department. Maximum funding will be provided to frontline services such as partnerships, community development programmes and drugs taskforces. Savings will be made in administration through the Department.
