The budget was set against a very difficult and different backdrop from budgets in recent years. The international crisis, about which we talk so much and which perhaps many of us do not understand to the extent required, has put enormous pressure on governments and politicians throughout the world to react in the best way they can to address their economic circumstances.

The crisis started in the banking sector and moved into the stock markets, so there has been a double impact. Many people have not started to focus on the very particular impact it will have on this country, namely, on foreign direct investment, investment already here and on our capacity to retain employment at record levels.

While many people are talking about a recession, it is almost like a virtual reality. For many people, it is just talk because they have not experienced the level of crisis economies throughout the world are in. It will take perhaps another six to eight months before people really appreciate how dire is the state of the finances not only of this country but of countries throughout Europe.

While there may be much outcry at present about certain measures — many of them will be highlighted over the coming days and weeks — it seems people really have not come to terms with the state of affairs on a national and international basis. People would find it a little easier to understand some of the decisions taken if they accepted that.

The diminishing tax returns, which required the budget to be brought forward, was really the first indicator. When the tax and capital gains tax returns are made in the middle of next month, it will bring into very sharp focus where the public finances stand. What is most important is to put order on the public finances. We all suffered in the past because governments on all sides failed to take the decisive action necessary. We cannot allow that to happen again.

The Opposition seemed to suggest that this budget was about attacking the young, the old and the low paid and that there was another target group, the high rollers. This is the Joe Duffy mentality, namely, that there is a group of high rollers which one can target. The truth is that the bulk of the tax take comes from middle income earners who are being stretched. When one looks at their income limits versus the income limits which are talked about loosely, one will see the pressure which is on so many people with high mortgages, child care costs, the cost of travelling to work, the cost of education and the cost of raising a family. The Opposition seemed to suggest that we should target these people but it will not come out and say that. There are not enough high rollers about which it talks. If we took the entire earnings of the so-called “multimillionaires”, it would not pay to keep anything going. It is important people are honest and that they set out clearly from whom they want to take extra money to shore up the public finances and to get us back on an even keel.

The other misconception floating about is that we bailed out the banks. We have thrashed this around the House fairly well but the Joe Duffy show seems to think we bailed out the [65]banks and propped up property developers. This has become common currency. While it is completely untrue, there is a belief that is the case.

There is also the notion that Fianna Fáil-led Governments blew our success in the good times.

In County Clare alone, the Ennis by-pass was built as well as the N18 to Shannon Airport. There were improvements to the N18 from Limerick through to Bearfield. The next phase of the work will bypass Bearfield, Crusheen and Gort to connect with Galway. Significant sums of money have been spent upgrading the infrastructure in the airport. Money has been spent on water and sewerage schemes in Liscannor, Feakle, Quilty, Tuamgraney and so on. That is where the investment has gone. That is not blowing the money. I am not suggesting Deputy Quinn said that but others have done so. That is investing for the future.

People have said we did nothing when we had surpluses and we did not squirrel the money away. Investing in infrastructure is squirrelling it away. It is putting in place the capacity for this country to continue to develop into the future. I do not believe that is a waste nor do I believe it was a waste for us to put significant funding into some of the smaller rural schools to maintain population in those areas. I do not want to list them but there are many. However, there is still work to be done. Ennis boys’ national school needs to be completed and I hope the Minister will be able to accommodate that next year. School upgrades are needed in Bearfield and Quin and I hope that can be done. Many schools throughout County Clare have been upgraded.

The Department of Health and Children has provided funding for day care centres. It has been suggested that we do not look after the elderly. We got it wrong in regard to the medical cards, we apologised and we are putting that right. Funding has gone into day care centres to allow people to remain in their homes and yet have contact with health care professionals and people in their community. It allows them to have a quality of life in their latter years.

Today the Minister for Health and Children gave €70,000 to a community group in my area to provide a bus to bring people from isolated areas to a centre five days a week. That is investment and if that is blowing money, I am missing something in terms of my capacity to represent the people who elected me to this House.

Clearly, there are fewer resources and we need to make some difficult choices. We must target the resources at those most in need. There was a time when it was possible for an element of luxury in terms of what we did because the resources were there but, unfortunately, that is no longer the case. Perhaps the public is not as focused on that as it will be in the coming months.

Many people in society — the number will increase — depend solely on the State to survive and we need to focus on them. The State must be in a position to help them.

No economist forecast that this downturn would come about. The market dislocation which took place in the United States, initially through the sub-prime crisis, instilled fear and created uncertainty. Anyone who has any understanding of the financial markets knows that fear and uncertainty are the principal drivers for a market collapse, which is what we have seen. There are companies whose asset base far outweighs their market capitalisation at present.

We are a small economy on the hind teat of Europe. Unfortunately, economic pressures probably affect us more quickly than France, Britain and Germany which have populations of 50 million to 60 million. It took them much longer to get the type of growth rates from which we benefited. Clearly, we will experience the downturn more quickly because of the size of our population.

Certain people in the Opposition put forward the notion that we should spend more, that this budget was measly and mean-spirited and that we should have taxed less and cut nothing. Some people have the luxury to do that but, unfortunately, the Cabinet does not have that luxury. There is a body of people looking to the Government to provide stability and an economic framework through which we can return to the kind of economic growth that will assist us in providing employment and a quality of life for future generations. Notwithstanding the difficulties that have arisen in the budget, the broad budgetary framework exists to support that approach. Some commentators suggest it may take longer to get back on track than originally expected, but we will get back on track.

I recognise the important measures proposed in the budget, particularly from the Department of the Environment, Heritage and Local Government, in terms of the investment in our water services to ensure the quality of drinking water. This measure is particularly helpful in my constituency for sewerage schemes in places such as Broadford, Clonlara, Curraclare and Labasheeda. Also, in light of much of the negative comment that has been made about the Department of Health and Children, the Minister has confirmed since the budget that the Ennis hospital upgrade will go ahead this year. That demonstrates the commitment to providing for the health care needs of the people I represent.

