I almost was going to ask who told the Ceann Comhairle I was from Tallaght. First, I thank him for giving me the opportunity to make my brief contribution to this important debate. I am mindful that Members and the Ceann Comhairle have had a long morning. School groups from Athboy, Tipperary, Blackrock and Ringsend have been visiting the Gallery this morning and I am sure they all have been fascinated by what is going on. While I am sorry there were no visitors from Tallaght, it is good to have young people in the Gallery to witness the business of the House.

Other colleagues have spoken of the different political times in which we find ourselves. It occurred to me yesterday that I have been around these streets for a long time. I sometimes remark that I am not from where people assume, as I was born around these parts, attended school in Clarendon Street and lived in Stephen Street. I am not afraid to admit the streets of Dublin yesterday were a different place. This morning, I reflected that Members often have seen groups on the streets such as teachers, nurses, doctors, farmers and anti-war protesters. I am a proud Dubliner but to my knowledge, the kind of scenes witnessed yesterday were unprecedented. While the students’ protest was to be expected, the number of elderly people was not. I am not afraid to make this point from the Fianna Fáil benches as my mother and grandmother, who came from these parts, would wish it.

Members should reflect on what happened over the past week. This morning, instead of coming in on the Luas, as I often try to do, I drove in for other reasons. The Minister of State at the Department of Transport, Deputy Noel Ahern, who is present, will be pleased to hear it did not take me very long. While so doing, I had the opportunity to listen to “The Tubridy Show” on RTE Radio 1, as I often do. Ryan Tubridy conducted an excellent interview for more than half an hour with the great Frank Kelly, who is known for his work on “Wanderly Wagon”, “Father Ted” and so on. It was an amazing, up-to-date and relevant discussion on the times we are in. I am sure Frank Kelly will not object to me stating that he made the point that he would have hoped those politicians who went out to address the protestors would have been allowed to speak. While I merely repeat his remarks, and not in a demeaning way, he made a fair point in this regard. I listened carefully to the interview, in which highly relevant points were made about the kind of day that was experienced in Dublin yesterday and on the reasons people were out on the streets to protest.

I always have been strongly in favour of the citizenship model. Without being flippant, I often have observed that I was not born a politician. I became involved in politics through becoming upset and agitated about different issues that affected my community when I moved to Tallaght. People encouraged me, which is how I became involved in politics. I will not forget where I am from and will not forget the issues that are of concern to my community. The Ceann Comhairle is aware that, in so far as is possible, I spend all day, every day in my constituency. Over the past week, I certainly have not hidden away. I have been out on the streets and in the shopping centres, including the Square, as well as outside the schools in my constituency.

It is important that politicians should get out and listen to the serious concerns of and upset felt by people, who have been frustrated and confused. Father Frank Herron will not object to me stating that he was in my presence on Saturday when a man accused me of taking away his medical card. However, I knew from his circumstances that this was not true and that he will not lose his medical card. While I do not suggest there are no political issues to be dealt with, as there are, there was much confusion, which drew the frustration, anger and upset. People genuinely believed, having listened to the hype, that they would lose their medical cards. As Members now know, many of them will not. However, that was the perception and politics is about perception.

One must get across the message and try to be more positive. I certainly will continue to listen to people in my constituency, which is the reason I spend so much time in Tallaght, Firhouse, Greenhills, Templeogue, Brittas and Bohernabreena. Having listened to the debate in recent days, it is clear all my other colleagues also listen to what people have to say. Incidentally, although people are positive about some matters, there has been much upset in the past week. Together with other colleagues, I am not afraid to apologise for the upset that has been caused to people in my constituency and the wider Dublin region, because it is important to do so. I am glad the Government, of which I am a member and supporter, recognised the mistake that was made.

In common with other colleagues, I acknowledge the many messages I have received in the form of personal calls, e-mails and letters from throughout the region and from further afield. Together with other colleagues, I received many e-mails from counties Donegal, Sligo, Kildare, Waterford and Kerry, which is fair enough. I heard a colleague observe this morning that this issue has put much pressure on our offices. To be fair, my staff, in so far as possible, has tried to respond rapidly, although there always will be those who tell one that one failed to get back to them.

Like Deputy Crawford, I was a delegate to the British-Irish Parliamentary Assembly over the weekend, which was an amazing experience about which I will talk on another occasion. [26] However, I took a call from RTE in Newcastle, appeared on the “Today with Pat Kenny” radio programme presented by Myles Dungan and made the points I now am reiterating in this contribution. People rang me to thank me for at least responding to and recognising the upset created by this episode. While I will not get into the argument raised by Deputy Gallagher last night about who said what to the Government, I certainly took my role as a backbencher very seriously. I conveyed to the party leadership, the Taoiseach, Deputy Brian Cowen, and my colleagues the issues that were being brought to my attention. Arising from that listening experience, I hope the decisions taken over the weekend and beyond in respect of the medical card and income levy issues were in response to what people were saying to Members. Everyone has a role to play in this regard and I am satisfied to have taken that role.

I am a Dáil Deputy and like everyone else, I was asked whether I would walk out of the party and resign. I was gratified when many of my constituents told me they concurred with my view in this regard. I stated that when I was elected in 2002 and 2007, people obviously voted for me for all sorts of reasons, including personal ones, although I am not as popular as many other Members. They certainly voted for me because of my community endeavours. However, as I stated on George Hook’s radio programme, those who voted for me were clear that I was a Fianna Fáil Deputy who was under the Fianna Fáil banner and that is my position. While I am not commenting on any other colleague, I strongly believe that one sticks to one’s tasks and focuses on the issues. One should have the courage to bring matters to the attention of one’s party leadership, both before the parliamentary party and in other conversations, and one tries to correct things that were done wrongly. I am glad we have made progress in that regard in the past week. Without being flippant, one could state, “a lot done, more to do”, but I will continue to represent the issues that are brought to my attention and that is important work for me.

Although the budget announced last week triggered all sorts of reactions, it included items such as the announcement by the Minister for Finance, Deputy Brian Lenihan, of an increase in benefits, as well as ideas and proposals for protecting young homeowners. He spoke about caring for families and children and keeping Ireland working. It is fair enough for the Opposition to claim that the current financial crisis is all the Government’s fault, but Sky News in England puts the blame on the UK Government and CNN in America blames the US Government. I will not argue with those claims except to point out that a global crisis clearly exists. It is important we demonstrate that Ireland remains open for business. We must continue to go about our business in terms of using public transport as much as possible, visiting places of entertainment and eating and drinking in various premises. Last Sunday, I took some stick in my local pub, Molloys in Tallaght village. The place was packed, which was a good sign in these difficult financial times. Somebody asked why people were giving out to me, given that I visited the pub every Sunday at lunchtime to buy a Lotto ticket and drink a mineral. It is important that we get across that positive message.

The budget set out strong policies to ensure Ireland keeps working. I have often discussed the need for job creation. Each of the 166 Members of this House can speak about the need for job creation in his or her constituency. I am not afraid to speak up for my area of Tallaght, which is the third largest population centre in the State after Dublin and Cork. The area has a very young population and has great educational facilities, including an institute of technology, which are turning out people who are looking for jobs. We have always faced challenges in Tallaght in terms of job creation. I was a founder member, in 1984, of the Get Tallaght Working Co-operative, which has become Partas enterprise group, which promotes job creation through the enterprise centres in Killinarden, Brookfield and Bolbrook. I have stressed the importance of job creation with Enterprise Ireland and IDA Ireland, and I will continue to do so. Happily, [27]my town has made progress in that regard but we are now facing into challenging times and unemployment is growing in all regions. This morning over breakfast, I read an article in the Tallaght Echo on unemployment and the challenges it brings. I can bring to my politics the experience of being made redundant on three separate occasions and I know what it is like to tell one’s wife and children that one has lost a job.

It is important, however, not only to look ahead for other employment opportunities but also to provide help and support. Even in tight times, the Department of Social and Family Affairs must continue to respond to these challenges. My colleagues spoke to newspapers about delays in the Department and I articulated similar concerns on behalf of my constituents. The Minister for Social and Family Affairs should send a positive message by ensuring that her Department deals with claims promptly and sympathetically. Constituents express concern that their claims are being delayed. Many young people find the back to education allowance and other schemes somewhat restrictive given the pressures they are facing. A balance must be struck in considering people who are under pressure and the current economic difficulties. The best way to look after people who are facing financial difficulties is to find them employment and I will continue to do that in respect of my town.

Good times are coming to Tallaght with the extension of the Luas, which has been a great success, to the west Tallaght estates of Fettercairn, Brookfield and Ardmore, and on to Citywest. This project will help people to access jobs and services.

The opening next February of the Tallaght stadium will also create employment. We are looking forward to the relocation of Shamrock Rovers to Tallaght. This season I have followed the team at every opportunity and when I attended Tolka Park last week I had an opportunity while walking along Drumcondra Road to speak with my good friend, Deputy Bertie Ahern. He calmed me down regarding the issues that have arisen. I was delighted to see him in the House last night and I wish him well. The role played by the Ceann Comhairle in developing the new stadium is widely recognised in Tallaght. During a recent function at which Shamrock Rovers won a special award from the South Dublin Chamber of Commerce for the work it is doing with Brookfield school, his efforts were acknowledged. I look forward to his visit to the stadium at some point in the future.

I am glad we made progress on medical cards and dealt with the concerns that arose regarding the income levy. I welcome the announcement by the Taoiseach that people earning less than the minimum wage of €17,542 will be exempt from the 1% levy. It was important for the Government to heed ICTU and those politicians, particularly on the Fianna Fáil and Green Party backbenches, who brought these issues to its attention.

Some say the next focus for the Government will be on education. I will not wait until next week before I suddenly start highlighting the need for Government investment in and support for education. I raise this issue constantly. Yesterday, I put down parliamentary questions on the need for a building programme in Our Lady’s secondary school, Templeogue, further accommodation in Holy Rosary primary school in Ballycraugh, Tallaght, and the need to staff the physical education halls in Killinarden and Firhouse. I speak about education on a regular basis and try to represent all the schools in my area. St. Mark’s primary school in my parish of Springfield has 1,000 pupils, 500 of whom come from 44 international communities. I am sure my colleague, Deputy Rabbitte, will join me in stressing the importance of educational facilities. In Springfield, where I live, I can make a special case. As this debate develops and teachers, parents and school communities make the case, it is important that all of us listen to what people say. When I am invited to meetings, I will attend. When I am invited to listen to parents, teachers and pupils, I will be there. It is important that we do that. It has been a difficult week politically but politics is not about the good times. I [28]did not come into politics to enjoy myself, I came in to take the knocks and focus on issues of interest to my community.

There is always time for party politics. I am not looking at Deputy Rabbitte when I say that, but while communities respect that we must play politics, they hope we can work together on issues of concern. As we work through the issues arising from the budget and the campaigns that will arise on educational issues, people will expect us to make political points but also to work together, and it is important that we do so.

I refer to the Age Action Ireland campaign on fuel poverty. I am the Vice Chairman of the Joint Committee on Social and Family Affairs. I chaired a session that was rather timely last Wednesday when we welcomed Age Action Ireland. The delegation spoke about medical cards but I have already mentioned that a number of times. The delegation focused on fuel poverty. At a time of difficulty, it is important that we make the case, and there is a case to be addressed and to be answered on this matter. Age Action Ireland would want me to do that and there was all-party support for the points made in that regard.

There has been much media focus on the issues mentioned over the past week. Medical cards struck the imagination and people also talked about the income levy and education — party leaders have said that this will be the next issue on the agenda. From the Government benches, I hope that in the midst of all this we do not forget other interest groups and issues of concern. In a particular way I support the case made by the Disability Federation of Ireland, a strong lobby. There has been much lobbying by many groups and many pre-budget submissions, including by groups in Tallaght in my constituency, such as the Tallaght Welfare Society. The society had strong views on the issues mentioned and on pensions, which have been parked in the midst of other issues. We should do our utmost to support the points of view expressed on disability and mental health services. The Disability Federation of Ireland needs to maintain its lobby, ensuring that as far as possible in difficult times account is taken of its needs. I expect that will continue to be a matter we will focus on for some time.

The presence of my colleague, Deputy Rabbitte, reminds me of another issue, that everyone has an issue, every community group and lobby group, and I do not hide from them. They are all on my desk, in the basket, and I am not afraid to speak up from the Government benches on the issues that are of concern to me. I hope Deputy Rabbitte does not think I am patronising him when I refer to my presence at St. Dominic’s Church, Tallaght, where he gave a fine address to the annual hope commemoration for those who have been affected by drugs.

There is a danger that while some issues grab the headlines — we have had a week of media hype about issues that are of concern to people — others are unmentioned. That includes the [29]point about disability and drugs difficulties and abuse, an issue that affects many groups. In my constituency, the Swan Family Support Group and the Tallaght Rehabilitation Project, whose boards I am on, have made the point that they cannot be forgotten in the midst of everything else. I am a member of the Tallaght drugs task force, with Deputies Rabbitte and Brian Hayes. We are entitled to our politics but it is important that the community sees we are fighting the cause on these issues and are not afraid to raise them. I spoke to every Minister I could find this week and discussed with the Minister of State with responsibility for drugs, Deputy John Curran, the concerns we are trying to articulate. It is important to give attention to the issues that are not getting attention.

There will be always be lobbying. My mailbox is full this morning and my desk is full of e-mails, including some from Limerick. I do not know if Deputy O’Donnell gets some from Tallaght.

I apologise, I am not as experienced as the rest of the Deputies and I have a little to learn from the more astute. I do not know if Deputy O’Donnell was here when I made this point so I will repeat that politics is not just for the good times. One must learn to deal with the bad times.

I have said it more than once in this contribution that I bring my life experiences to politics. This includes living through difficult times. I lived through the late 1940s, the 1950s, the 1960s, the 1970s, the 1980s and so on. I had to look for a job, I had to emigrate and I might be living in London today were it not for the fact that I got homesick. Deputy O’Donnell would not have the opportunity to have a go at me if I was across in London doing something completely different. I came home, got a job in difficult times and each time I lost my job through no fault of my own, which might happen again, I kept my head down and focused on what I was doing and what I wanted to achieve.

The position is no different today. I am clear about the upset, frustration and anger that exists in my community. I have been talking to and listening to people. When they wanted to have a go at me, I took it because that is important. I am not afraid to represent the concerns that people bring to my attention. It is important that we are having this debate.

As far as my difficult work schedule has allowed, I have listened to as much of the debate as possible. I accept, as the nice Deputy across the House said, that I am sitting on the Government benches and that is where I will stay because I do not believe that being outside the tent is the way to get the job done. I will continue to represent bravely all the issues that are brought to me by all my constituents and community groups. If people are looking for me over the next couple days or over the bank holiday weekend, they should come out to Tallaght, Templeogue, Greenhills and Firhouse and they will find me easily enough.
