This budget comes at a critical and defining time for our country. We all know that the international economic climate has altered radically in relatively recent times. The scale of this challenge and the pace at which circumstances have changed have combined to lift this budget out of the routine of economic management to one of critical importance to the future well-being of our country. This is no time for adjustments at the margins. This is a time for strong, firm and decisive leadership. It is a time to put the interests of our country to the fore and sectoral interests firmly on the back-burner. In framing this budget the Government has been very aware of the central role of education to economic progress and social cohesion. This awareness is reflected in an increased allocation for education.

The gross allocation for the education Vote in 2009 is just over €9.6 billion, representing an increase of €302 million and an overall increase of 3.2% on 2008. Education has received unprecedented levels of support from the Government in terms of increases in overall funding over the past ten years with education spending now more than treble what it was in 1997 when overall funding was just €3.1 billion.

The overall capital allocation for 2009 is being increased to €889 million. This represents an increase of nearly 10% compared with 2008. The Government recognises the essential importance of continuing to invest in our future productive capacity during the current economic downturn. This increased allocation will provide for a very significant construction programme and will see major projects under way across the country. This is in addition to the smaller capital projects that will be offered for public tender under the devolved grant schemes. As well as providing employment in the construction sector, it is my firm belief that increasing competition within the sector will provide increased value for money, enabling us to derive maximum benefit from this investment. In the tenders being received in the Department, we have noted a drop of 15% to 20% in the prices being quoted.

The 2009 capital allocation for schools will enable my Department to complete 26 major projects and commence construction on another 62 major projects. It will permit completion of 100 smaller projects on site and allow another 80 projects previously approved to progress to completion. In addition, a further 2,600 primary and post-primary places will be delivered in developing areas under the fast-track programme for September 2009.

As I previously indicated, I will be making some provision for a summer works scheme for 2009. The summer works scheme has been extremely successful in enabling schools to address long-standing infrastructural issues. Since the scheme was introduced in 2004, 3,000 projects, costing €300 million have been completed. Work will also continue on my Department’s public private partnership programme, with four post-primary schools due to commence construction [778]before the end of 2008. When completed, these schools will provide 2,700 school places. Procurement has commenced on the second bundle of six schools and work on identifying the third and fourth bundles of schools is well under way. When compared with the level of activity under the schools building programme in 1997, when only 42 large-scale primary and post-primary school projects were under way with a capital allocation of just €92 million, it is clear that the scale of delivery in 2008 is unprecedented and is an exceptional achievement. I am very pleased I will be able to maintain a similar level of activity in 2009.


Turning to higher education, the capital allocation is being increased by over €100 million to €265 million in 2009. This represents an increase of almost 50% compared with the projected outturn for 2008. The 2009 capital allocation is one of the highest annual levels of investment in core higher educational infrastructure over the past ten years and represents an increase of just over 75% when compared with the funding of just €68 million provided for universities and institutes of technology in 1997. The allocation will enable me to continue the programme of investment in upgrading and modernising undergraduate facilities at institutes of technology, universities and other colleges. In addition, it is intended that the first bundle of third level PPP projects will be offered to the market this year, with the second and third bundles following at six-monthly intervals.

On the research side, the increased investment will allow continued progress in delivering previously approved projects under the programme for research in third level institutions. The year 2008 marks the tenth anniversary of the programme for research in third level institutions with total investment under PRTLI to date of €865 million, including €648 million direct Exchequer funding provided by the Government. I will also make an announcement in the coming weeks in relation to PRTLI 5. I will be providing for a further round of funding under the research facilities enhancement scheme for the improvement of research infrastructure. This competitively awarded scheme has been very successful in providing targeted moneys for restoring and updating equipment and facilities where strategic research is ongoing. In the course of the next few weeks and months, I will announce details of specific new projects and programmes that will be funded from this allocation in 2009. Overall, the increased capital allocation for the higher education sector will provide better infrastructure for students, lecturers, researchers and others working in Ireland’s higher education sector.

Given the scale of the economic circumstances facing the country, I do not for a moment pretend the allocation for education, enhanced though it is, allows us to avoid tough decisions and choices. The €8.5 billion current expenditure on education is predominantly on frontline services. It is the grossest dishonesty, as the Opposition has done, to peddle trite and simplistic notions that the scale of adjustment required in education can be met by painless and populist measures. Approximately 80% of the current allocation goes on the salaries of front line teachers, SNAs, lecturers and others working across the education sector. A further €500 million goes on school running costs. Other large elements of the budget include areas such as provision for school transport. It is disingenuous to pretend that necessary adjustments required in the national interest can be obtained without having recourse to these areas.

The Opposition, where it is critical of individual policy choices, owes it to the people to present real, tangible alternatives rather than vague, meaningless rhetoric.

There are no such tangible proposals in the Fine Gael press releases.

These are strong on criticism and utterly deficient in saying anything that might offend anyone, anywhere. In the Fine Gael document Recovery Through Reform, the reference to a 3% reduction in the budgets of Departments, including Education and Science, is meaningless in the absence of specifics.

It is significant that the Department’s salary bill constitutes less than 1% of the education spend.

Were the Department to be abolished the Deputy’s party would still have to find a further 2% savings and some mechanism for paying teachers, SNAs, managing school transport and the building programmes in the absence of any people to do this.

I assume this is not what Fine Gael envisages. However, if it is, the party should say so. You, Deputy Hayes should issue another press release to confirm your position.

I apologise.

On this occasion, when Deputy Hayes is outlining policy, I suggest he put less emphasis on sound bites and more on substance. It is essential to place the current measures in a proper context. In 2009, taking account of the measures announced today, the net pay bill for teachers’ salaries and pensions will increase by almost €300 million as a result of a combination of pay increases and the full year costs of the salaries of teachers appointed this September. The allocation provides for increased enrolment in primary schools and the continued growth in provision for special needs in primary and post-primary schools. In addition, pay costs will rise by some €40 million to cover the full year costs of additional SNAs in the system this September as well as provision for additional posts next September. Earlier [780]this year, the Government specifically shielded teachers and SNAs from the general 3% payroll cuts announced for the public sector.

In making the hard choices required in the current circumstances, the Government has acted in a balanced and measured way. To help limit the growth in public sector pay, it is necessary to increase the number of pupils required for additional classroom appointments in both primary and post-primary schools by one pupil with effect from September 2009.

In the case of fee-paying post-primary schools the number of pupils required will increase by two. This change to the pupil-teacher ratio will increase average class sizes.

It is also necessary to reintroduce a cap of two on the number of language support teachers per school. However, in response to Deputy Hayes’s speech, support will be provided to help reduce the impact of the cap on those schools with very large numbers of pupils requiring language support.

With effect from 1 January 2009, substitution cover for uncertified sick leave in all schools and for official school business in post-primary schools is being suspended. I am asking schools to consider carefully the necessity for absences at events outside school which take place during core class contact time.

Substitution cover will still be paid for all other categories of teacher absence currently provided for and the 37 hour scheme of payment to teachers for supervision and substitution will continue.

There will be rationalisation of in-career development courses for teachers in 2009. However, we will continue to provide a wide range of courses to teachers in key areas including special education and language support.

On school funding, improvements are being made to the rates of capitation funding available to schools with a total value of €20 million. I cited here to the Opposition spokesperson on education that it was my desire to increase the levels. Despite the stringent financial circumstances, at primary level the standard rate of capitation grant has increased from €57.14 per pupil in 1997 to €178.58 in 2008.

[781]The ancillary services grant has also substantially increased from €38.09 per pupil in 1997 to €151.50 in 2008.

The increases in capitation and ancillary grants I have announced will see day-to-day funding for primary schools increase by nearly €25 to €355 per pupil.

At post-primary level, capitation will increase by €14 per pupil to €345, an increase of 4.3% over 2008.

I have also made provision for an increase of €8 per pupil in equalisation funding provided to voluntary secondary schools. A number of specialist grants have been abolished with the general capitation increases aimed at giving schools maximum flexibility in how they use their grant allocation.


I have also decided to regularise an anomalous situation whereby fee-charging schools under Catholic patronage were not in receipt of certain grants, including the support services grant, that were paid to other fee-charging schools. This measure will see all fee-charging schools treated on the same basis regardless of religious denomination.

The education of students with special educational needs continues to be a key investment priority for Government. This is reflected in the fact that there are now more than 19,000 teaching staff and SNAs working in our schools. The full implementation of the Education for Persons with Special Educational Needs Act by the target date of October 2010 is being deferred. Services will continue to be provided by my Department on a non-statutory basis.

The Government is committed——

[782]——to providing targeted support for special needs and has allocated additional funding of €20 million for 2009 to continue to enhance front line services for these children. Some €10 million is being provided for my Department and this will complement the additional level of supports to be delivered through the allocation of €10 million to the health service. The additional allocation in my Estimate has enabled me to provide a 33% increase for the Department’s psychological service. This will mean more psychologists working directly with children in our schools.

The psychologists will also support school staff in catering for children with special needs in the school setting. Funding will also be provided to the National Council for Special Education to enhance its capacity to co-ordinate the provision of services at local level for children, parents and schools.

We envisage putting in place an additional 50 psychologists so that this year there will be a psychologist available in every area of the country. Up to now, coverage was at 60%——

At the end of the this budget, we will be in a position to cover 100% of the country.

Am I all right for time?

I have already outlined the increased capital allocation for the higher education sector.

The Estimates provision for higher education is €1,844 million as compared to €1,887 in 2008. The Estimate allows for an increase in the student registration charge from its current rate of €900 to €1,500 in individual institutions for the academic year 2009-10 and combined, this funding is generally in line with the projected outturn in 2008.

Given the current economic climate, it was not possible to provide an increase in current funding for the sector in 2008. However, the current level of funding must be seen in the context of the substantial increases in funding for the third level sector in recent years, whereby the overall provision to the sector, including capital provision, has increased to some €2 billion in 2008. This is an increase of 33% in the last four years and an increase of 135% since 1997.
