ocial welfare has been prioritised in this budget because next year total funding for the Department of Social and Family Affairs will be €19.6 billion. This represents an increase of €2.6 billion or 15.5% over the Estimates allocation for 2008. More than 1.7 million people and their dependents will benefit from this expenditure, including 440,000 pensioners, 345,000 ill and disabled people, more than 80,000 carers, 30,000 low income working families availing of the family income supplement and more than 580,000 families that receive child benefit payments.

[819]The budget includes provision for an average live register figure of, unfortunately, 290,000 next year. This compares with an average of just under 210,000 in the nine months to the end of September this year and an expected average of 220,000 for 2008 as a whole. The Government is doing everything it can to keep unemployment as low as possible but it is prudent in the current economic environment to set aside funding in case it continues to rise.

Providing for the expected increase in the live register alone accounts for €1.25 billion of the planned increase in spending next year. In addition to this, provision has been made for €515 million worth of improvements in social welfare rates and qualifying conditions. At a time when it is essential that public expenditure be strictly controlled in the national interest, this increased provision for social welfare is an unambiguous statement of the Government’s intent to protect the vulnerable and less well-off in society.

Unfortunately, it has been necessary to take some steps to reduce expenditure but these have been kept to the absolute minimum and applied in a careful manner.

As Deputies will appreciate, there was no easy way to achieve the required savings. Consideration had to be given to a wide range of changes and very difficult decisions had to be made. Neither I nor the Government have taken these decisions lightly. In total, the new expenditure control measures contained in the social welfare budget will amount to net savings——

——of €124.9 million next year when compensatory measures are taken into account. Of this, €72.7 million is accounted for by changes to the social insurance system.

As Members know, Ireland’s social welfare system is based on two quite different types of entitlement, a social insurance system for people who have paid sufficient PRSI contributions and a social assistance system for people without adequate contributions who have little or no household means of their own.

Social insurance is intended both to enable people to insure themselves against adverse life events such as illness or unemployment and to provide for their State pensions and other benefits, through contributions to the national social insurance fund. Social insurance benefits are not means-tested. Instead, entitlement depends on having paid the required number of PRSI contributions relevant to the benefit one wishes to claim.

For the past 11 years, the social insurance fund has been in surplus, with more than sufficient income to the fund to cover the payments being made from it each year, without the State having to provide a subsidy. However, that is changing. As a result of further increases in the live register, expenditure is expected to exceed income to the fund by over €200 million this year and approximately €900 million next year. Although these current deficits can be met from the accumulated surplus, it looks likely that the Exchequer may yet again have to subsidise expenditure from the social insurance fund within a few years. In that context, it is appropriate to look at some of the instances where people with a very limited or distant contribution record have been able to qualify for very significant benefits, regardless of their household income.

[820]Currently, people who have paid just 52 contributions in total can qualify for jobseeker’s benefit, illness benefit and health and safety benefit. This means, for example, that migrants or young workers who have only worked here for one year are entitled to claim jobseeker’s payments for 12 months, without having to satisfy a means test. This will change from next January, when the number of required paid contributions will be doubled to 104 contributions for new claimants.

A further anomaly that exists at present is that some people, who were previously working part-time, can receive a higher rate of payment from these schemes than what they were actually earning while at work. Again, this is considered to be inappropriate and a disincentive to employment. Therefore, from next January, this situation will be addressed by increasing the earnings thresholds which apply to the reduced or graduated rates of payment from €150 to €300 per week.

At present, it is necessary to have made 13 paid contributions in the relevant tax year to qualify for illness benefit. However, this condition does not exist for jobseeker’s benefit, with the result that people who may not have paid PRSI contributions in the past number of years can qualify. Again, it is considered that this position does not adequately reflect the contribution-based rationale for social insurance. Therefore, from next January, new claimants for jobseeker’s benefit will be required to satisfy the same conditions as those on illness benefit and must have paid 13 contributions in the relevant tax year.

The other two changes being made to jobseeker’s benefit relate to the duration of the payment. At present, people who have 260 or more paid social insurance contributions can receive jobseeker’s benefit for up to 15 months. As of today, this is being limited to 12 months for current claimants with less than six months duration on the scheme, as well as for all new claimants.

Where the claimant has less than 260 paid contributions, the maximum duration of jobseeker’s benefit will be nine months, instead of 12 months, if the claimant currently has been in receipt of benefit for less than three months and in respect of all new claimants.

New claimants for jobseeker’s benefit will in future have to have paid a total of at least 104 contributions to the social insurance fund, with at least 13 of these paid in the relevant tax year. The rate of payment will more closely reflect what the individual was earning prior to becoming unemployed and the duration of the payment will be either 12 or nine months depending on the number of social insurance contributions they have made in the past. Taken together, these changes to jobseeker’s, illness and health and safety benefits are expected to generate €72.7 million in savings next year and €119 million a year from 2010 on.

Those who will be affected by these changes will be able to claim jobseeker’s allowance or supplementary welfare allowance instead if they have limited means.

[821]The maximum rate of these two schemes is paid at the same rate as jobseeker’s benefit.

The final social insurance change involves a new limit on the duration of illness benefit payments. Illness benefit was intended to provide income replacement for insured persons during short spells of incapacity or illness, while other payments are available to people who cannot work long term because of a disability or a medical condition. However, there is no limit on the amount of time for which illness benefit can be paid to people who have more than 260 social insurance contributions. Over 28,000 persons have been receiving the payment for more than two years. As a forthcoming OECD review notes, “paying sickness benefit without time limitation is very unusual across the OECD, for good reasons”. The report points out that there is a great risk that people in such circumstances will never return to the labour market.

Accordingly, the Government has decided to confine entitlement to illness benefit to two years’, 624 days, duration for claims arising after 5 January 2009. Persons currently in receipt of illness benefit will not be affected by the change. Some 8,500 persons on illness benefit pass the threshold of two years’ duration on illness benefit each year and such persons are likely to be affected by the proposed ceiling on duration.

Approximately two thirds of these will satisfy the medical criteria to access either invalidity pension or, subject to a means test, disability allowance. Medical criteria for both of these schemes require certification that the condition is likely to last for a further 12 months. This measure will not result in any savings in 2009 or 2010, but should save up to €101 million in a full year after the two-year rule has fully come into effect, which will not be for a number of years.

Changes will also be made to the disability allowance. Currently this can be paid from age 16 to young people with a disability and is worth approximately €200 per week. Domiciliary care allowance is a payment to the parents of children who have a severe disability requiring continuous care and attention which is substantially in excess of that normally required by a child of the same age. It is worth approximately €300 per month.

The National Federation of Voluntary Bodies is an umbrella organisation for 63 voluntary agencies who provide direct services to people with intellectual disabilities. Its members account for in excess of 85% of the country’s direct service provision to people with intellectual disabilities. Its submission to the Department’s review of the disability allowance argued:

At present the age for receipt of disability allowance is 16 years. We deem this to be too young. This does not give an incentive for a child to pursue work or education options. Subsequently a child may fall into the dependency trap too early. Instead parents should receive the domiciliary care allowance for the child until they are 18 years old.

The Government has decided to implement this change. The age of eligibility for entitlement to disability allowance is being increased from 16 years to 18 years for new claimants. This change will not affect existing 16 and 17 year olds on disability allowance.

As an alleviating measure, the age for entitlement to the domiciliary care allowance is being increased from 16 years to 18 years. It is estimated that a weekly average of 539 persons will be affected by this measure in 2009 and 2,115 in a full year. These changes are expected to save €5.6 million in 2009 and €16.6 million a year from 2010.

[822]The changes being made this year to illness benefit and disability allowance are intended as only the first steps in the modernisation of the illness and disability schemes. A comprehensive approach will be developed when the reports of the current review of the disability allowance scheme and the OECD review are finalised and the Department has had the opportunity to assess them fully.

The final expenditure control measure relates to the rent and mortgage interest supplements. All recipients of these payments are expected to make a personal contribution towards their accommodation costs from their own resources. The minimum level of this contribution is currently set at €13 per week. This rate has not been increased since January 2004, despite the fact the lowest rate of social welfare payment has risen by nearly €70 per week since then. It is also significantly less than the minimum rent paid by local authority tenants which, for example, is €24.87 in Dublin city and €26 in County Limerick.

As of 1 January 2009, the minimum personal contribution to rent and mortgage interest supplement is being increased by €5 to €18 per week. With some 72,000 people in receipt of rent and mortgage interest supplements, this measure is expected to generate €19 million per annum from 2009 onwards.

Yesterday, the Minister for Finance announced the Government decided that from now on child benefit will no longer be paid in respect of those who are 18 years old. At that age they are effectively treated as adults in most respects. This change will be phased in gradually. A half payment will be made in respect of existing and future qualifying children from January 2009. From January 2010, the payment will cease from the 18th birthday.

Special alleviating measures are being introduced for young people in social welfare dependent and low-income families, with a special increase of €15 per week in the qualified child payment for those aged 18 years. It is expected that some 10,000 young people will benefit from this measure. In addition, the back to school clothing and footwear allowance will be increased by €215 to €520 per annum for eligible 18 year olds. Recipients of family income supplement will receive additional payments of up to €15 per week for each dependant aged 18 years where they are not otherwise being compensated. These transitional measures will cease in January 2011. The net savings from this change to child benefit entitlements is expected to be €27.6 million in 2009, €67.2 million in 2010 and €79 million per annum from 2011 onwards.

Even in these difficult economic times, the Government has prioritised delivering real increases in social welfare payments. Some Opposition spokespersons have referred to the fact that the 2009 social welfare increases are below this year’s inflation rate. That is not the point.

The 2008 social welfare increases far exceeded the increase in the consumer price index in the current year. As the Minister for Finance announced yesterday, the projected rate of inflation for 2009 is 2.5%.

[823]The budget provides for increases of between 3% and 3.8% in the basic payment rates next year. These increases are also in line with the wage rises agreed by the social partners in the second phase of the national pay agreement.

The maximum personal rates of payment for the State contributory and non-contributory pensions and State pension transition are being increased by €7 per week from the start of January 2009. State pensioners will also receive an extra €6.30 per week for a qualified adult dependant such as spouse aged over 66 years and an extra €4.70 per week for contributory qualified adults under 66 years.

The price of fuel is an issue of major concern for many people, but especially the elderly and the ill. I am pleased to announce the value of the fuel allowance is being increased by €2 to €20 per week, an 11% increase, with effect from January. The duration of the fuel season is also being extended — which is what many people asked for — by another two weeks from April 2009, bringing it to 32 weeks in total.

These improvements to the fuel scheme will cost almost €30 million extra in 2009 and will benefit nearly 300,000 households.

The maximum personal rate of payment for all working age schemes is being increased by €6.50 per week with effect from the first week of January 2009, with proportionate increases applying to people on reduced rates. The rates of qualified adult payments are also being increased on all schemes by €4.30 except for the invalidity pension scheme where a €4.60 increase will apply.

Social welfare-dependent parents currently receive an extra €24 per week for each child on top of their basic social welfare payments, through what is termed the “qualified child increase”. This is being increased by €2 to €26, or 8.3%, per child with effect from January 2009. In the case of qualifying children of 18 years of age, the total rate will come to €41 per week, including the special payment in lieu of child benefit.

Improvements are also being made to the family income supplement, which is paid to low income working families. Income limits for the FIS are being increased by €10 per week in respect of each child, giving an average extra payment of €6 per child per week.

The income thresholds for entitlement to back-to-school clothing and footwear allowance are also being increased to enable 18,000 more families to benefit from the scheme. These increases are in addition to the special measures already mentioned for 18 year old children. In addition to these improvements in social welfare schemes, the budget also provides an extra €500,000 for the Family Support Agency to support programmes to promote positive parenting skills.

I now want to address the future of the Combat Poverty Agency and the Money Advice and Budgeting Service. A review of the Combat Poverty Agency was undertaken on foot of a Government decision on 6 June 2007. The purpose of the review was to examine the role of the agency in light of the emergence, since 1986, of comprehensive strategies and new institutional arrangements to promote social inclusion. These include the Cabinet committee on social inclusion, the Office for Social Inclusion and the voluntary pillar in social partnership.

[824]Having considered the review report, the Government has decided to integrate the Combat Poverty Agency with the Office for Social Inclusion. I do not intend that the Combat Poverty Agency will simply be absorbed into the Office for Social Inclusion in its existing form. Rather, a new strengthened division will be created, which will make the best use of the considerable experience and expertise of the staff of both existing bodies and will seek to address the weaknesses identified by the review in relation to both.

This new division can provide a stronger voice for those affected by poverty and social inclusion issues. I am conscious of the concerns about the need for independent scrutiny of public policy that have been expressed by some interest groups. I agree that independent critique is very important and this move is not intended to reduce the scope for such work. As the review report notes, the function of independent reporting on poverty is no longer as dependent on the Combat Poverty Agency as it was in earlier years. This is due, for example, to the emergence of other independent data sources, such as the statistics on poverty reported by the CSO, and independent analyses by bodies such as the ESRI and NESC, and on the international front by the EU and OECD.

Ireland is well served by the social partners and a wide range of NGOs and other groups who have a strong voice in public debate about poverty and related issues. I intend to prioritise putting in place procedures to ensure that the views of these and other stakeholders, including people experiencing poverty, continue to be available to Government in developing and monitoring the social inclusion strategies. The Department is currently finalising proposals as to how this might be achieved.

Another body the Government examined as part of the review of State agencies was the Money Advice and Budgeting Service. MABS staff provide a highly valued service to people who are over-indebted and need help and advice in coping with debt problems. However, it has been recognised for some time that the service needs a proper legislative basis and structure. It has been decided that this can best be achieved by placing MABS with the Citizens Information Board. The MABS and citizens information centres complement each other as both are involved in providing information, advice and advocacy services to the public. In addition, the CIB has a long association with the MABS at both national and local level and was involved in establishing some of the original MABS pilot projects. I stress that there will be no change in the status of the 53 independent MABS companies, nor in the employment status of their 240 employees.

These are the main elements of the financial and other changes incorporated in the social and family affairs part of budget 2009. With extra funding of €2.6 billion next year, a range of improvements will be made in social welfare schemes, including €7 extra per week for State pensioners; €6.50 extra per week for welfare recipients of working age, such as jobseekers and those on illness benefit; an extra €2 per week on the fuel allowance, with payment also being made for an additional two weeks; increases in child-related payments to those dependent on social welfare and improvements in the family income supplement for low income working families; and 18,000 more families becoming eligible for the back-to-school clothing and footwear allowance.

To fund these improvements along with making payments to increasing numbers of people on the live register, it has been necessary to make savings in some areas.

[825]However, we have kept these expenditure control measures to an absolute minimum. I have confidence that, given the circumstances, we have done our best to protect those on social welfare who are most in need.
