It attacks my patience to its elastic limits to listen to Deputy Fahey and his party giving lectures about political responsibility to members of the Fine Gael Party. Like Deputy Fahey, I have been a Member long enough to know what it is to be both politically responsible and politically irresponsible. I was a backbencher during the Fine Gael-Labour coalition Government in the 1980s and I recall the bear pit politics and circus in this House, the centre of democracy in this country, engaged in by Deputy Fahey and his colleagues, a number of whom are Ministers today. The Minister of State, Deputy Curran, may not recall these times but I recall the shenanigans in the House every day during that period. I will not listen to lectures from Deputy Fahey or any other Government backbencher about being politically responsible.

When the country’s interest is on the line, Fine Gael always steps up to the plate and I only have to go back two or three weeks when the financial future of the country was about to disintegrate and not to the 1980s or 1980s for the latest example. Fine Gael, led by Deputies Kenny and Bruton, stood up and backed the Government to the hilt. I was a Member when the Tallaght strategy was adopted. Fine Gael supported the Government and the strategy of which Alan Dukes was the architect but there are vital differences between today and 1987.

First, the strategy implemented the programme for Government on which Fine Gael had fought that year’s election and we were honourable enough to support the strategy. Second, a minority Government was in power following the 1987 election and it could not implement a policy without the co-operation of the Opposition. The Government parties have a majority of ten nowadays, which was reduced to seven last night. They do not need a Tallaght strategy but a vigilant Opposition that will oppose the brutal cutbacks announced in last week’s budget is needed.

I recall being present in the House when the interest of the island, North and South, was in question and the Anglo-Irish Agreement was signed by Garret FitzGerald on behalf of the Fine Gael-Labour Government. When the national interest was in question, Fianna Fáil sent some of the most senior members of the party to the US where they were given short shrift and they were sent home with their tails between their legs by honourable American politicians.

I am obliged to answer the charges made by Deputy Fahey. Deputy Reilly, my colleague, has been accused of this, that and the other. However, Deputy Martin introduced the free medical card for the over 70s as a political stunt without carrying out negotiations with the doctors, the Department of the Health and Children or the health boards and he underestimated its cost. He has been exonerated by Government backbenchers but, hopefully, he will not be by the people. As Minister for Foreign Affairs, he has washed his [43]hands of everything that happened over the past week while his colleagues carried the burden and he hopes to return on his white steed in a few years when, hopefully, Fianna Fáil will be in opposition.

I am also reminded of another political stunt by a Fianna Fáil Minister in 2003, the so-called decentralisation programme. A total of 54 centres were designated and thousands of civil servants were to be transferred throughout the State. The programme was due to be completed in 2006. Three centres were selected in County Donegal with 250 civil servants to be decentralised to Donegal town and a few hundred to Buncrana while Foras na Gaeilge was due to move to my parish of Gweedore. Not a solitary civil servant has been transferred to Donegal.

This is a crisis budget, which was brought on by the actions of the Government, bankers and developers. There is an international financial crisis but we are experiencing a home-grown economic crisis. No matter what happens in America or England, we have our own difficulties. A total of 70,000 additional people are unemployed since the day the Government took up office in 2007. That is happening in Ireland, not America, because the Government financed a construction bubble. Every worthwhile economist in the country knew this. For the past three or four years, Deputy Bruton warned the bubble would burst and when it did, there would be economic and financial chaos. That is why a crisis budget was announced last week and it has unravelled over the past few days before our eyes.

A supplementary budget will be introduced in the spring and this time next year the budget deficit will be much more significant. The Government parties have created that deficit and I wonder whether they will be able to address it. If the Government parties address it in a meaningful, constructive and responsible manner, we will support them but if they continue to attack the elderly, the youth and the sick, we will not jump on the train with them.

Like Deputy Fahey, I am a former teacher. The budget is a full frontal attack on the education of young people. The programme for Government stated the pupil-teacher ratio would reduce from 27:1 to 24:1 during its first three years in office.

At the first opportunity, the Government has increased the pupil-teacher ratio to 28:1 and God knows what it will do over the next few years. This is a broken promise.

I had a discussion with the former Minister for Education and Science, Deputy Hanafin, on Raidió na Gaeltachta yesterday morning. In 2002 she stated no child under nine years of age in the State would be in a class of more than 20 pupils. Lo and behold, at least 150,000 pupils under the age of nine years are in classes of not more than 30 pupils, rather than 20. This is the Government’s record in education.

Deputy Bruton and our education spokesman, Deputy Brian Hayes, were mentioned. In one hour, they identified 32 brutal cuts in education. Some jump out at me. When I see a curtailment in the school building programme, I remember the vocational school in Stranorlar, Finn Valley College, where work has been on the cards since 1979. I think of Gortahork, which has been seeking a new school for years, my former school of Scoil Chonaill, Bunbeg, Pobalscoil Ghaoth Dobhair and countless other schools throughout my constituency. How many more years must they wait because of the curtailment?

Two cuts relating to the Irish language jump out at me. According to the Government, it will be the saviour of the Irish language. The summer colleges, which most of us who did not live in the Gaeltacht attended at one time or another, were financed from three sources. Parents and the Departments of Community, Rural and Gaeltacht Affairs and Education and Science made contributions. The latter Department’s contribution was meant to pay for the teachers of the 30,000 to 40,000 young people attending the colleges every year. What has the Department done with the capitation fee of €50 per pupil this year? It has not been reduced. Rather, it has been abolished. This will be a body blow to the young boys and girls studying for their junior certificates and leaving certificates and to the economy of Gaeltacht mná tí from Donegal to Cork and Kerry who are depending on the boys and girls to generate income so that they can keep their families together and educate them in the years to come. It will also be a blow to tourism in the Gaeltacht. Most tourists visiting Gaeltacht areas in Donegal, Galway and elsewhere are the parents, guardians, uncles, aunts, grandfathers, grandmothers and other relatives of the pupils. The abolition is a treble-edged sword.

The second cutback was also vicious. For a number of years, we have brought teachers into our area because we had none of our own. They are young men and women who did not get into this country’s training colleges. A former Aire oideachas is listening to me. Those people were trained in Northern Ireland and elsewhere in the UK. They came to Ireland and, before being recognised as fully fledged teachers, were obliged to do Irish oral and written examinations. The Department was generous, probably in the time of the former Minister, Deputy O’Rourke, and facilitated those people in spending two or three weeks in Gaeltacht areas. The Department gave them grants because they might not have had full-time jobs. This grant for unqualified teachers attending Irish courses in the Gaeltacht has not been reduced. Rather, it has been abolished. People are suffering.

Much has been stated on medical cards, but I will not comment because my good colleague beside me will have something to say. However, we are discussing health. I have been a Member for long enough to know that we all remember what health cuts do to the old, the sick and the poor. The mantra on the other side of the House is that the Department and the Health Service Executive have increased the health budget from £3 billion in 1997 to €16 billion in 2008. Considering the country’s hospitals, clinics and surgeries, it is difficult to determine where progress has been made. Money has been poured in, but there are no visible results.

Last week, it was announced that Letterkenny General Hospital would close two orthopaedic wards from 25 October until further notice. What does this mean to those people, be they elderly or otherwise, who need hip or knee replacements and so on? This is the type of budget before us. There could be more and more of the same but, if the Government is responsible, we will support it.
