While sitting in the Chamber for the past hour or so awaiting my turn to speak, I have been listening to speaker after speaker on the other side of the House stating that sacrifices must be made and the books must be balanced. While that is all great stuff, at whose expense? This budget is a complete cop-out. I had the pleasure of serving in the Cabinet a couple of times and anyone who knows anything about running a country is aware that the three main spending Departments are Education and Science, Heath and Children and Social and Family Affairs. The bulk of public expenditure takes place in them.

The Government has copped out from taking the hard decision to cap salaries or have a pay freeze and to deal with reform of the public service. Instead, almost 85% of the total budgets of the Departments of Health and Children and Education and Science go [341]on salaries. Consequently, those who wish to make cuts without touching salaries will be obliged to fiddle around with 15% of the budget. This is the reason for all the stupid decisions that have become apparent since the budget last Tuesday. I wonder whether anyone foolproofed this budget before the Minister delivered it, as anyone who did so would have discerned the wrongdoing that was being perpetrated on two essential groups in society, namely, the elderly and our schoolchildren.

I am in my 60s and can remember my parents and many neighbours who were much older than me. They lived on scrapings in Ireland and fought to educate me and others when there was no free education. They paid high rates of tax, in excess of 70% or 80%, at times when things were bad. These are the people who were singled out in this budget to balance the books and to get the economy back on track. What a load of nonsense. The Minister for Health and Children has a budget of €15.8 billion and I will refer to the Minister for Finance’s budget speech and the facts he presented therein. He stated: “Since the establishment of the HSE the number of whole-time equivalent staff has increased by 12%.” The number of administrative staff alone has increased by approximately 1,900 since the executive’s establishment. The Minister went on to state that the Government has decided that a targeted voluntary early retirement scheme will be introduced for the HSE and discussions are under way on the development of such a scheme. This will initially be targeted at surplus middle management and administrative staff, he added.

This is a Minister for Finance who admits the HSE, which has a budget of €15.8 billion, has surplus staff about which he has done nothing for a number of years. He has allowed the number of administrative staff to increase by 1,900. However, the single cut he sought in this area was to take medical cards from people who are over 70. What an extraordinary thing to do. Moreover, the Minister stated, with hand on heart, that we all must make sacrifices. This constitutes complete and utter mismanagement and cowardice of the worst order.

When this debate resumes tomorrow, I will deal with the subject of education in greater detail. However, I will refer to others who have been affected. I received an e-mail from a lady who spends her life looking after children with autism, particularly those who leave primary school and attend secondary school. Heretofore, at 16, such children were in receipt of a disability allowance of €197. It went to the family towards dealing with this terribly difficult problem. However, in this budget, the Minister has decided to take the allowance from 16 year olds and one now must be 18 before getting it. Although there are 1,900 surplus staff in the HSE, the elderly and the disabled have been hit. I refer to a disability allowance for a 16 year old whose parents must put up with tremendous hardship. They must travel for miles to get any sort of education for a child who is not capable of earning a living alone. This is the sort of cutback one gets when one funks the hard decisions and does not do one’s job. In the past ten years, the Government has failed to do its job. I do not want to hear hypocritical comments that, having listened for the past week, the Government suddenly realised the hardship it was causing for old people by taking away their medical cards. What a load of nonsense.

One now hears that everyone, save the super rich, will retain them. To be super rich is to be someone on €700 a week, which is €36,400 per year. This is the exact figure to which the Minister for Finance, in his budget, has increased the standard 20% rate of tax. In other words, those who now are on the standard rate of tax are being called the super rich.

How will this system work? What constitutes a couple? In the case of a married couple in which the wife has no income, will she be regarded as having an income of €36,400 in order that she and her husband can earn up to €1,400 per week? Alternatively, [342]is it someone who has independent means? What happens if one of them dies? Does the other partner lose his or her medical card? Should they take into account any small savings they may have? None of these questions has been answered. The level of uncertainty increases with each passing day because the Government refuses to recognise that it made a great mistake in asking vulnerable people over 70 years of age to give up their medical cards. As I have noted, the income limit is the same figure at which one pays the standard rate of income tax. The Government should not try to claim it now only intends to take the cards from the super rich and that 95% of those who are over 70 will have a medical card. How can the Government possibly state that a person who is on the standard rate of income tax is part of the super rich? Such nonsense is hard to stomach.

Regarding the other interesting point that arose in the Minister’s speech, Members should watch this space. The next thing to be attacked will be child benefit. Will there be another debacle on child benefit and will incomes be taken into account? The Minister stated he intends to halve child benefit payments for children aged 18 and, eventually, the benefit will be taken away from them. This marks the beginning of another system of taking away a benefit that was awarded previously, through the taxation system, without an income limit. It is the beginning of something which will cause untold problems in the future. Will the Minister explain how people on the standard rate of tax at €700 per week are suddenly the super rich?

It is difficult to get into the mood to discuss the budget following such a heated debate. One must be very careful.

When I adjourned the debate yesterday evening, I was addressing my criticisms of the Government in failing to tackle the big picture. That failure has led to a series of silly cutbacks, which will cause untold harm and political damage to the entire system. I appeal to the Minister to ask the Fianna Fáil scriptwriters why they must always compare what is happening nowadays to what happened 12 years ago. Can we not move on and be more mature in dealing with issues? The circumstances 12 years were entirely different. Every time I hear a Government spokesperson, he or she makes comparisons with 1994, 1997 and 1982. This is so ridiculous that it is hardly worth commenting on because Fianna Fáil has been in power for 19 of the past 21 years.

[822]Its Ministers have had 19 years to put the economy straight and there is no point comparing what they have done to what the coalition did between December 1994 and June 1997. They have had 19 out of the past 21 years to put everything right. They will have to admit they took over a healthy, strong economy in 1997. It was the first time in the history of the State that a budget surplus was achieved. This is an undeniable fact. I was pleased to be part of the outfit that handed over a strong economy to the Minister and his colleagues even though I had to surrender the keys of the Mercedes to people such as his good self. We are proud of what we did during the tenure of that good Government.

I refer to the cutbacks in health services. Fianna Fáil and its partners set up the HSE. They amalgamated all the health boards without putting in place a new management structure. The Minister for Finance said in his Budget Statement that he had suddenly discovered the HSE, since its establishment, had increased its workforce by 12% and created 1,900 administrative posts. He said he will have an investigation carried out and redundancy will be offered. People over 70 are being asked to surrender medical cards while everyone is being asked to pay increased charges for other services, yet the HSE has a budget €15 billion to cover the needs of a population of less than 4 million and has established an additional 1,900 posts since it was set up. How many medical cards would that buy? However, we must go through a process of persecuting groups of people who are badly in need of services.

The new charges include an increase of €34 for a visit to an accident and emergency department; an increase of €9 in the public hospital bed charge to €75; a 20% increase in the cost of private beds in public hospitals; and an increase of 20% in the long stay charge. One can imagine the hike in VHI charges a result of these increases. This has resulted from a failure in proper management and administration by the HSE and, lo and behold, the Minister for Health and Children, together with her Cabinet colleagues, has taken a political decision to deal with cutbacks in her budget by persecuting people aged over 70. If she cannot find €100 million in savings out of a budget of €15.8 billion without persecuting these people and increasing charges for those who are ill and need services, there is something radically wrong with the Government’s management.

The Minister for Finance should not ask Opposition Members to be patriotic and to support these mad cutbacks when no one else supports him. I have no intention of supporting of such cutbacks. If there was no other option and the country was on its knees, I might consider it a form of patriotism. However, the HSE was allowed to go out of control and recruit 1,900 additional administrative staff. The failure of the Minister and the Government to put in place a new management structure for the body from day one leaves a great deal to be desired.

I refer to education cutbacks, including a reduced schools building programme, the abolition of substitute teachers from January 2009, the abolition of the equipment for resource teachers, a reduction in the Traveller education budget, the abolition of grants for physics and chemistry at a time our young people need to be educated in such subjects and a €7.5 million cutback in the funding for school books. Where are we going? College registration fees have been hiked to €1,500 despite there being no increase in the student maintenance grant. I have listened to various Government politicians saying how important it is to help children from disadvantaged areas to benefit from third level education, with which I agree, but how will these provisions help a child from a disadvantaged area to undertake third level education? It is not a question of merely getting into college, but of staying there as well. One needs bus fares to get to and from college. If one does not live nearby, one must stay overnight. One requires assistance with books and one needs pocket money.

[823]I will give the House an example. I came from a local authority housing estate. My father was a postman and, because I grew up in an era without free education, I saw him working a turnstile at Croke Park on Sundays to pay for my second level education. I saw people’s struggles. Today, those are the same people we are punishing. We are asking them to carry the burden of the problems created by the Government. Given that 19 of the past 21 years saw Fianna Fáil in government, it cannot blame anyone other than itself.

The Government is telling us that children from disadvantaged areas should be given every chance to attend college. However, it is not just a question of getting enough points to enter third level if one comes from a local authority housing estate and one’s parents do not have any money. Who will pay for bus fares? Who will buy——

Yes, one must spend €1,500 at the start, then find money for books, to dress oneself, to pay bus fares and to feed oneself. Given the cuts, it is hypocritical to state that we are trying to give everyone a chance to attend a third level institution. The cuts are due to the fact that the Government failed to see the big picture.

As the Minister will admit, 80%-85% of the education budget is spent on salaries and wages. If one does not tackle this problem and the issue of numbers, one must consider cuts in the remaining 15%-20%. In this light, one is bound to make silly, stupid cuts that affect people who pay taxes.

I do not want more hearts bleeding for children who should get access to third level education. I want practical help to be given to them. They can appear at a social welfare office to get assistance before walking the streets. Would we not be better off spending the money helping every child to become skilled, to attend college and to have a positive and creative way to fulfil his or her life? These are the practical day-to-day problems that people must face, not theories or seminars on how to spread wealth. Given the fact that people need education and skills for today’s society, how can anyone in the Government increase registration fees, not increase the maintenance grant and abolish grants for school books? It is a disgrace. Let us cut out the hypocrisy and address reality.

I will address climate change and carbon emissions. I have the pleasure of chairing the all-party Joint Committee on Climate Change and Energy Security. I am proud of my position and of the committee’s members, who work hard. We have noticed the various Government statements on targets and the actions to be taken. Ireland is running out of time and the failure to meet targets will cost the taxpayers money.

We discuss transport often, but what are we doing? What movements has Iarnród Éireann made to shift freight from our roads onto trains? What advances are we making in terms of additional sources of public transport so that people can leave their cars behind? There are quality bus corridors, QBCs, with no buses on them. To worsen the insult, they are 24 hours per day, seven days per week QBCs, but I have yet to see a bus running at 4 a.m. It is shambolic symbolism.

What are we doing about our targets? We are sitting down and agreeing further cuts with our European partners despite not having achieved our current targets. For example, if someone wants to go on a cycling holiday to County Kerry, how can he or she bring a bicycle? I have written to Iarnród Éireann to ask whether it has small carriages at the back of trains in which to store goods. That way, one would have somewhere to put a bicycle, but what can one do with a bicycle now? We are being given grants for bicycles, but how can the latter be carried to County Kerry? Should one put it on top of a car and drive? It is a contradiction.

[824]In most other countries, one can put a bicycle on a train. If one wanted to cycle into work from where I live and it is raining in the evening, surely one should be able to get the DART home and put one’s bicycle in a small carriage at the back. It is simple. In Copenhagen, for example, taxis have been encouraged to carry rear fittings so that, if it is a wet evening, one can put a bicycle on the taxi and hop inside. We have not even reached that point, yet we are discussing entering into commitments on further cuts.

Transport is one of our greatest emissions problems, but agriculture is an equal problem. Will we halve our cattle stock? How can we achieve the targets? Have we negotiated within the EU to transfer our savings in other sectors to compensate for our inability to reduce agricultural emissions? If we are to be the food basket of Europe, surely it is in the EU’s interests that we produce food for European citizens. Will we cut back, making food more expensive due to its scarcity? No one has attempted to negotiate on behalf of Ireland in this regard. We are blindly walking into and accepting targets without realising what we are entering into. It is not a question of simply brushing off the failure to achieve the targets as just another failure. If we do not achieve them, we will pay a considerable amount of money to purchase credits to compensate for our inability to effect reductions.

Before leaving the topic of transport, I want to mention something. In our final days in government some years ago, we considered opening Baldonnel Airport to commercial flights. As the then Minister for Defence, I held discussions with the Defence Forces. The Air Corps reverted to me to state that it would be only too pleased to see the airport being used for commercial flights provided facilities were ring-fenced for Air Corps activities. It would have suited everyone. The runway would have been used for both purposes and the Air Corps would have been relieved of maintenance duties. The airport at Collinstown is packed on a daily basis. I see no reason that internal flights should not leave from Baldonnel.

I ask Deputy Gogarty to continue playing with his laptop until I finish my contribution. He will have a chance to respond to my comments when his turn comes. In the meantime, I ask him not to interfere with my train of thought.

I see no reason that Baldonnel cannot be used for internal flights. It is located off the N7, close to the M50 and convenient to developing areas in Kildare and elsewhere. It could even be used for flights to the United Kingdom and for charter flights. This would relieve congestion at Dublin Airport and on the roads surrounding it. Every time there is a traffic jam, more emissions are released. We have gone to great trouble to regrade motor vehicle taxation in order to encourage people to purchase vehicles that emit less CO2, yet we are not dealing with the problem of traffic jams. A greater level of emissions may arise on Pearse Street on a wet Friday afternoon than may accrue from 100 cars driving in and out of the city centre. Will the Minister report back to the House on the difficulties, if any, that present in terms of using Baldonnel Airport for the purposes I have outlined? It makes perfect sense, offering an ideal location and with the prospect of helping to lower considerably our emission targets.

The current difficulties in the financial markets have arisen because there has been a breakdown in trust between banks. Banks are no longer prepared to lend to one other because [825]they do not trust their counterparts’ ability to make repayments. This breakdown of trust is a consequence of the sheer greed which saw bankers lending money to those who could not afford to make the repayments. Bad debts were bundled up and sold on and the result is that the trust between banks has broken down. We may ask about the role of the supervisors who were supposed to manage all this. The reality is that this type of supervision was considered unimportant as long as money was being made.

The problem throughout the financial sector is that banks want to be building societies or insurance companies and vice versa. One calls to mind the old saying that plumbing is for plumbers. If I have a plumbing problem, I do not seek the services of a carpenter. Throughout Europe, we must restore standards in financial dealings so that people can have trust in the system. We must return to a position where utmost good faith is a basic principle in any contract law. For example, insurance cannot be underwritten unless there is good faith.

There is much talk of re-financing and so on in the financial markets. Ultimately, however, trust is everything. I read an article in the business section of the Sunday Independent which detailed how the Irish Nationwide Building Society has pitched in for Mohamed Al Fayed at Fulham Football Club. How is it that a building society which was established to provide mortgages is investing in Fulham Football Club? This is apparently the second time it has made such an investment, having already invested €22 million via a group of property developers involved in the purchase of Craven Cottage. The same article reveals that Bank of Ireland is involved with Arsenal Football Club and Wembley Stadium. We have spent recent weeks discussing how we may restore confidence. It is only through effective regulation and control that we can hope once again to enjoy the benefits of a successful financial sector.
