In working with the Minister for Education and Science, Deputy Batt O’Keeffe, and the Tánaiste and Minister for Enterprise, Trade and Employment, Deputy Mary Coughlan, there have been many challenges in the finalisation of the 2009 Estimates process in the areas for which I have responsibility. Difficult choices on priorities for investment had to be made to control public expenditure and to ensure sustainability in the long run.

My areas of responsibility are lifelong learning across the Department of Education and Science and the Department of Enterprise, Trade and Employment, and social inclusion and [839]school transport in the Department of Education and Science. I have responsibility for overseeing the effective co-ordination of lifelong learning across the two Departments. In this capacity, I am the chair of the interdepartmental committee on the implementation of the national skills strategy. This committee has responsibility for drafting and implementing a plan to realise the targets and objectives contained in the national skills strategy. It is my intention that this plan will examine the existing provision of education and training to ensure a co-ordinated and efficient provision between the respective education and training sectors. The implementation plan will also determine the key areas and initiatives that will require continued priority focus to achieve the objectives of the national skills strategy. It is my intention that this implementation plan will be completed by early next year.

It has been necessary to have a prioritised approach to the 2009 Estimates. While the provision for further and adult education in 2009 shows a small increase on the outturn for 2008, nevertheless it will involve very careful management of the available resources and a reduction in the number of places being funded. This reduction is of approximately 500 places in the back to education initiative, BTEI, and 100 places in senior traveller training centres and will mean the number of places in the BTEI returns to 2007 levels. I shall endeavour in the context of the 2009 provision to safeguard the position of adult literacy, the vocational training opportunities scheme and Youthreach. Allowances to participants in the vocational training opportunities scheme, the Youthreach scheme and the senior Traveller training centres will be increased in line with the appropriate social welfare rates or FÁS trainee allowances. We will continue to provide over 30,000 places in the post-leaving certificate sector.

FÁS and Skillnets, which are the Department of Enterprise, Trade and Employment’s two key training providers, have increased their focus on the provision of training to the low skilled in response to the national skills strategy. As a result of the current economic difficulties, particularly the rising unemployment rate, the Government has prioritised the provision of the necessary support services to assist people who have been made redundant and are unemployed. This focus, which will continue in 2009, will be a central part of the delivery of the vision outlined in the national skills strategy. This lifelong learning objective is important. I am pleased to note the three qualifications agencies are to merge as a single body. This was one of the rationalisations of agencies announced in the budget.

Since I was appointed as Minister of State in the Department of Education and Science, I have worked closely with the Further Education and Training Awards Council. The council has been effective in developing a broad range of awards for all learners across further education and training. It is responsible for levels 1 to 6 of the national framework of qualifications. Progression arrangements are being enhanced by this set of new awards, together with the work of the Further Education and Training Awards Council. The merging of the three organisations as a single agency will enhance the lifelong learning approach and ensure the benefits of the councils’ work over the past seven years will be realised. The new organisation will build on the leading quality assurance role Ireland has played throughout Europe in the further education and training and higher education sectors. Ireland has made a real difference on the international stage in this regard. The qualifications bodies have ensured we play a lead role in policy development and implementation. I am delighted the lifelong learning approach to qualifications and quality assurance, which is embodied in the national framework of qualifications, is fully reflected in a single strong agency that prioritises the needs of learners.

The Delivering Equality of Opportunity in Schools, DEIS, action plan is the central element of the Department’s social inclusion strategy, which promotes equality of educational opportunity for all. A key part of the strategy involves focusing the additional resources which are available on the areas of greatest need. Schools which have been identified as disadvantaged will continue to be fully supported. When the DEIS initiative commenced, it provided for [840]concessionary measures, to last for the duration of the programme, whereby continuing funding would be provided to schools which were no longer classified as disadvantaged. In prioritising expenditure in 2009, it is necessary to cease such concessionary measures. This means that additional posts will be withdrawn from schools which were included in previous disadvantaged schemes but are not included in the DEIS initiative. Similarly, the top-up capitation funding provided to such schools, as well as the dispersed disadvantage funding given to schools not included in DEIS, will be withdrawn. This withdrawal is in line with the broad thrust of the recommendations of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General in its 2006 report on primary disadvantage. The office suggested a more focused approach to prioritising expenditure should be put in place.

The 2009 Estimates recognise the importance of the school transport scheme in supporting school access and attendance, particularly in rural communities. The Estimates provide for an increase of 12% in the 2009 allocation, when compared to the initial allocation for 2008. This will enable the provision of school transport for over 136,000 children, including approximately 9,000 children with special needs. The additional funding is particularly important in light of the increase in the number of children in schools, the establishment of new schools and the expanding number of children identified as having special educational needs. I have prioritised funding for school transport to ensure their needs are met. The increase also reflects some of the cost pressures which are relevant to school transport. In particular, the allocation allows for a compensatory allowance to be paid to private contractors who can avail of a fuel rebate scheme until the end of this month.

To meet current demands, payments of post-primary transport charges are being increased with effect from next summer. A single payment of €300 will be payable for each child. The maximum individual family charge payable will increase to €650. Eligible children in families that have a medical card, or children with special needs, will continue to be exempt from the charges. The single payment system is a new departure. It will mean that planning can be undertaken more efficiently for a full school year by Bus Éireann. It will ensure that concessionary transport will be confirmed on the basis of a full school year, rather than on a term-to-term basis. I am aware the term-by-term allocation has caused difficulties for many children and their families. Post-primary transport charges will meet approximately 20% of the cost of post-primary transport in 2009.

Many difficult decisions have had to be made in considering the 2009 Estimates for my areas of responsibility. A commitment has been demonstrated to prioritising investment in difficult economic circumstances. I am confident the steps being taken will ensure the available resources are appropriately used to have the most effective impact in these areas. They will provide for sustainability in the long run.
