Last Tuesday, when the budget was announced, what sickened me most was seeing the Fianna Fáil backbenchers and Independents standing up and clapping the Government. The only thing they did not do was sing the song of the Fianna Fáil choir, “Sinne Fianna Fáil”. They were so delighted about the budget I thought they were going to start singing. When they go home this weekend they will not be singing that song. They will be singing sad songs because they will have the blues.

Yes, “Where is my money gone?”. The pensioners, people who will have to pay the 1% levy, people on social welfare, the sick and the underprivileged of the country will be waiting for the backbenchers and the Fianna Fáil Ministers. By next week, the over 70s will have their medical cards back because when these backbenchers go home next weekend, they will get the backlash from the people. The backbenchers will not be clapping and they will not be singing “Sinne Fianna Fáil” in the Dáil with the Fianna Fáil choir that was here last Tuesday.

I remember when the Deputy’s colleague from Cork, the Minister, Deputy Micheál Martin, introduced the medical card scheme in 2001. Deputy Martin was one of the greatest disasters as a Minister in the Departments of Education and Science and Health and Children. He announced free medical cards for the over 70s and he told the people of the country this would happen before reaching a deal with the doctors. They are paid €197 for a person under 70 years who has a medical card but over €640 for a person over 70 years, which is a scandal. It is no wonder that country is in this mess.

The Government is responsible for one scandal after another. Consider the nursing home debacle where the Government took money off pensioners; it must return that money now. Consider the people who prop up the Government on a weekly basis, namely, the Fianna Fáil backbenchers and Independents, Deputies Finian McGrath, Jackie Healy-Rae and Michael Lowry. I say to those who will be talking to the Fianna Fáil backbenchers in the coming days that these people said before the election that this would not happen. They said last week it would not happen. However, on Tuesday the Minister for Finance came to the House and targeted the people that suffered in this country. These are the people who in the 1930s, 1940s [122]and 1950s paid 60% and 70% tax when the country was going down the drain. What happens when the time comes that such people need something back, such as their medical card? It is taken off them.

I look forward to talking to my colleagues after they go home this weekend. I suspect what they will hear is something like the calls my staff and I have received in my office or the discussions on national and local radio. People are appalled that the great republican party, Fianna Fáil, which has always said it would look after the old, sick and weak, is looking after the builders and the bankers again this week. There will be legislation tomorrow to save the bankers.

I would love it if the officials from the Financial Regulator and the Central Bank who did not do their jobs were sacked. Fianna Fáil will never sack anybody. I do not know why. Although I would not like to name anybody outside the Dáil, I probably know why certain people are paid massive money for jobs they cannot do.

The Government’s next scandalous attack will not take place until the new year. It will be the meanest of the mean. I do not understand why the income levy is not confined to people earning more than €70,000. People earning less than €100,000 will be subject to a levy, or double taxation, of 1%. Those earning more than €100,000 will have to pay 2%. The Government should have attacked the super-rich. Young people often take jobs in supermarkets to pay for their education or help their families. They will have to pay the 1% levy, even though they might earn as little as €3,000 a year. It is the greatest scandal of all time. Middle class people, who are already under pressure to pay for health care, education, child care and mortgages, will face major difficulties as a result of this decision.

The Dáil will meet in January or February, when people are starting to realise that money is coming out of their pay packets. The levy will affect their ability to meet their fuel costs and pay their mortgages — in other words, to keep their families going. Meanwhile, the taxpayers will have to keep the banks afloat, whose chief executives earn more than €1 million per annum.

My constituency colleague, Deputy O’Mahony, mentioned a scandal affecting my part of the country which I planned to raise this evening. What does Fianna Fáil and its Government partners have against the west of Ireland? Why do they always keep us down? Why are we always blackguarded? I refer on this occasion to the scheme the Government has drawn up to charge people to leave this country from our airports. If one travels from Dublin Airport to Glasgow, London or Edinburgh, one will have to pay €2. If one travels to the same locations from Knock Airport, one will have to pay €12. What kind of thinking is that? Where are the Fianna Fáil backbenchers from County Mayo? What will Deputies Calleary and Flynn do about this scheme? Will they allow the Government to put Knock Airport at a disadvantage once more? Why is the Government doing this? Many people had to emigrate from this country in years gone by. Now that the ship is sinking once more, thanks to Fianna Fáil, those who are emigrating will have to pay the Government €12 to leave the country.

What is the Minister of State saying?

[123]The Government wasted €50 million on electronic voting machines.

Last year, the Department of Health and Children spent €61,000 designing and printing a national action plan. I do not know what the plan was, but it certainly did not work because the Department is in disarray. A further €57,000 was spent on a booklet giving people information about the family income supplement. The Department of Communications, Energy and Natural Resources spent €72,000 on a booklet explaining the “makeITsecure” campaign. The Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food spent €1 million on mobile phones. In light of the information I have given, it is a disgrace that the Government is trying to take medical cards from those over the age of 70. When the Fianna Fáil backbenchers go home this weekend, they will know all about it.

I will talk about child benefit, a matter the previous speaker would not understand, if the constituency he represents is anything to go by. I am sure he is always talking to builders, attending race meetings and associating with the super-rich. The half-rate child benefit payment will no longer apply to those aged 18 and over and those who have moved on to third level education. An increase of €7 in child benefit is proposed at a time when inflation is 4%. I note that Deputy Ned O’Keeffe is in the Chamber. I am surprised he will allow his Government colleagues to take the medical card from the over 70s. This afternoon, the Minister for Health and Children gave the Deputy’s backbench colleagues the wooden spoon on the backside and they had to take it. The Minister, Deputy Harney, told them to sit down and be quiet. It is no wonder the Progressive Democrats are in disarray. They are almost gone. After this week, we will not hear “Sinne Fianna Fáil” any more. We will say goodbye to Fianna Fáil because that party is on the way out as well.

What does the Government have against farmers who have had to endure one cut after the other? The only increase the Minister, Deputy Ó Cuív, has secured in the Department of Community, Rural and Gaeltacht Affairs relates to the payment given to those who teach Irish outside the Gaeltacht. There have been no increases in any other schemes. The budget of the Western Development Commission has been cut by almost half. The allocations to all the other rural schemes have been cut by half. The payment given to people to heat their homes has been cut. I do not know where the Ministers, Deputies Ó Cuív and Smith, were when these cuts were agreed. Perhaps they were not at the Cabinet meeting that day. If so, they are like their ministerial colleagues who claim they were in Ireland when EU directives were being agreed in Europe. Some Ministers complain when we refuse to offer them pairs for Dáil votes, even though they are not always present at the EU meetings they are supposed to be attending.

This is the cruelest, meanest and lousiest budget this State has ever seen. I do not mind when the rich are affected by budgetary changes, but I hate it when the Government targets the poor. The rich are always looked after. The rich get richer as the poor get poorer. Fianna Fáil’s new policy is to keep the working class down. We will have many more debates on this budget. I assure Deputy Ned O’Keeffe, in case he is worried, that Fine Gael will table a simple motion on medical cards next week. I am sure many Members of this House, including Deputies Healy-Rae, Finian McGrath and Lowry and some of their Progressive Democrats and Fianna Fáil colleagues, will go on local radio this weekend to tell their constituents they do not agree with the proposed changes to the medical card system. Next week, we will give them an opportunity to vote against the proposals when we table a simple motion.
