The net effect of yesterday’s statement by the Minister for Finance to the House, in terms of the education budget, is that children will pay the price for Fianna Fáil’s incompetence over the past five years. The children in primary and post-primary schools must pay the price for the Government’s incompetence, waste and wanton disregard for financial stability.

The Taoiseach lectured the House this morning about honesty in this debate. Let us have that honesty from the other side of the House. When the Minister for Finance gave his statement to the House yesterday, he did not refer to cutbacks in education. Yet, within a matter of two hours, the Minister for Education and Science, who appears to have done a runner today and is not about the place at all, produced a list of cutbacks which runs to 32 in total. There are 32 cutbacks in the Education and Science Vote planned for 2009 but the Minister for Finance in the House did not refer to this yesterday. If we are to take patronising lectures about honesty in this debate, let us put all the information out there and stop spinning, as this Government has done for the past 11 years or so. Let us call it as it is — we are asking children to pay the price for the Government’s incompetence. That is the reality that faces teachers, parents and students today.

The education budget here has historically been smaller than education budgets in other European countries because the religious orders provided free education for many years, although that has now changed. We spend approximately 4.6% of our GDP on education, which is the second lowest in the European Union. Another problem is that we have a very high number of students in the age cohort for formal, full-time education. We do not spend enough on education and we spread the money so thinly, throughout the sectors, as to make no real difference. The situation will get much more difficult next year throughout all sectors of education. I want to make one proposal to the Minister for Education and Science when he finally manages to get to his seat today and if he does speak in public on this issue. He needs to publish a revised programme for Government in the education area and stop this wish list and phantom list currently in place to which the Government has allegedly signed up.

I also want to hear from the Green Party. When the deal was done last year, Deputy Trevor Sargent was a bit like Neville Chamberlain with “peace in our time” when he promised €350 million extra in services each year for the next five years. He also promised a reduction in class size and I will come to that. The Green Party has a responsibility to come to the plinth and tell us exactly how it has all gone so wrong. Why has it lost the debate within Government when it comes to the education vote? I never thought I would state this, but even at this stage Deputy Mary Hanafin should return — all is forgiven — as the situation has deteriorated rapidly since her demotion to the Department of Social and Family Affairs only a matter of months ago.

With regard to class size, prior to the general election, 20,000 parents were brought to public halls throughout the country. I call on the same organisation which brought those 20,000 parents into the public domain——

——to recall those meetings and remind them of the blatant lies told by the Members opposite during the course of the election campaign. Let us revisit that campaign because we need to expose those who spoofed the Irish people and parents on this issue.

In 2002, the then Minister, Deputy Mary Hanafin, promised that by 2007 no nine year old or younger would be in a class of 20 or more. As I stand here today, 200,000 of those children are in our primary school system and in classes of more than 20. A blatant lie was told in 2002. The Government went further in 2007.

In terms of the untruth then, in 2007 the Members opposite promised the staffing schedule would go from 27:1 to 24:1 in the first three years of this Government. What has happened? From 1 September next year we will have 400 fewer teachers in our schools. Class size is the second worst in the EU and we are behind a range of eastern European [751]country which went through the communist era. It is some achievement for the republican party opposite.

On 1 September next year we will have the worst class sizes in Europe. We have a responsibility to the young people in the system and to their parents to do the best we can. We cannot do this with a class of more than 30 children where the range of issues which apply must be dealt with. We need clarity from the Government.

When Deputy Mary O’Rourke as Minister for Education in the 1980s introduced the famous circular that led to public demonstrations, it was never enforced.

Will the Government reconsider its proposal to slash the number of teachers in schools? Otherwise, it will feel the wrath of parents between now and 1 September. There is historical precedent for doing a U-turn on this. The then Minister, Deputy Mary O’Rourke, did it in the late 1980s and the Government should do it today.

We also need clarity from the Government on the question of car parking charges. Will every teacher in the country who brings a car to a school car park have to pay the levy?

Is this the Government’s position? That is some selling point to the INTO, the ASTI and the TUI. The Government will have a lot of breakfast with that.

One of the most cynical cutbacks is with regard to English language support. In the run-up to the 2007 election, following pressure from Deputy Enda Kenny, the leader of Fine Gael, the Government stated it would change the rules on the numbers of English language support teachers in schools with a substantial number of non-English speaking pupils. We are returning to pre-2007 levels. Yesterday, in his private briefing to educational correspondents, the Minister stated it will be two per school. Schools with a large number of immigrant children will get two teachers. Where is Deputy Conor Lenihan now?

[752]His budget is now €6 million. There would be more taken over the meat counter in Tesco in Tallaght over six months than he has to spend in 12 months. Where is the Minister of State with responsibility for integration, Deputy Conor Lenihan?

On the issue of higher education, the new registration fees are effectively fees by the back door. This is the most inequitable unfair stealth tax ever imposed on the PAYE sector. I make no apology for my party’s support with the Labour Party for abolishing fees in 1996. We did it for one reason. Whatever about arguments on access, and there is evidence to show more could be done there, we did it to help the PAYE sector who were screwed as the self-employed could cook their books to get the best benefit they could from the system and the wealthy could get support through a covenant.

This is the worst stealth tax and more importantly where is the Green Party? Has it signed up to it? It would be a most extraordinary U-turn if it has.
