I have seen it all now. Has Fianna Fáil learned nothing from the history of the State? Did the Taoiseach not state that he wanted to set Seán Lemass as his role model and follow his dynamic leadership in building a new Ireland and in making brave decisions for the good of all Irish people? These were his words only a few months ago when he assumed the office of Taoiseach. I now know that he wanted to follow the proven failures of de Valera, his economic or other policies that have proved to be failures over the course of time. Instead of dancing at the crossroads, we now have singing at the crossroads. Was it a coincidence that budget day was the late Eamon de Valera’s birthday? The Government has gone back in time to make the same mistakes. Will Fianna Fáil never learn?

Let me remind the Taoiseach of who is responsible for handing his colleague the misfortune of becoming the Minister for Finance. One of de Valera’s adversaries, Winston Churchill, once stated: “We contend that for a nation to tax itself into prosperity is like a man standing in a bucket and trying to lift himself up by the handle”.

In 1997, Fianna Fáil was left a strong, sound economy. When we handed over the reins of government, the volume of exports was growing at 17%, but it has collapsed to just 6%. Under our Government, productivity was growing at 8% per annum, but it has collapsed to just 2%. Then, our market share increased by 25% in four years, but this Government has cut it by 20% in four years. To use one of Fianna Fáil’s phrases, one could say that the economy was slowly roasting on the barbecue. Fianna Fáil took it, shoved it into the microwave and turned it up to turbo power. When the party saw the steam leaking out from the top, bottom and all sides, it watched in amazement and did nothing, but assured us at the same time that we would have a soft centre. Now Fianna Fáil wonders why it must clean up the explosion of debris on all sides of its cooking experiment. It is blaming the whole world, but not its little version of coward economics.

When I look at our two financial wizards, the two Brians, I am reminded of those famous black and white films in de Valera’s time, when I was still going to school, of two fellows in black suits, one of whom said to the other: “This is another fine mess you have got me into.”

In the current Taoiseach’s budget speech last year, he stated the national development plan was his top priority. Postponing or delaying it would be “a major policy error”, which would “damage activity next year and impair our quality of life in future”. This is another fine mess. The Taoiseach also stated that the provision of medical cards for vulnerable families is a priority for the Government, pointing to the commitment in the programme for Government to double the income eligibility limit for parents of children less than six years of age and to treble it for parents of children less than 18 years of age with an intellectual disability. That puts a whole new meaning on the phrase “A lot done, more to do”.

To remove the automatic entitlement to a medical card for those over 70 years of age is another example of the Government’s maladministration. It bribed the electorate with this measure and wasted taxpayers’ money in implementing it. The then Minister for Health and Children, Deputy Martin, underestimated by half the numbers availing of this benefit. He had [46]not consulted doctors before the scheme was announced and ended up paying them five times what they were paid for treating patients who obtained their medical cards after a means test.

It is not the fault of the over 70s that the then Minister for Health and Children, Deputy Martin, did not read another of his briefing papers, with the result that the taxpayer had to shoulder the exorbitant cost of providing these “golden” medical cards. To remove this security from the elderly and possibly infirm in tough times shows a mean streak in the Government. It is exacerbated by the reduction to the standard rate for tax rebates on medical expenses. Does this apply to those who have worked to be in a position to pay their own nursing home costs, those who must pay for nursing home recuperation after surgery, those who do not want to enter the fair deal arrangement or those who employ a carer for an elderly relative? What a wonderful effort to protect the weak and vulnerable.

The Minister for Finance is proposing to raise an extra €2 billion from the hard-pressed taxpayer. A large portion of that figure is accounted for by glaring mistakes on the part of various Ministers, such as PPARS, illegal nursing home charges, electronic voting, the additional costs associated with medical cards for the over 70s, the “Bertie bowl”, Thornton Hall, Punchestown, the Kenmare marina project, the M50 toll bridge and so on. Instead of suffering only a 10% reduction in their salaries, the Ministers concerned should have been sacked. Members may recall a television programme called “The Six Million Dollar Man”. Now we have the Six Billion Euro Wasters.

Last week, I tabled a parliamentary question on the provision of roadside facilities for tourists travelling around Ireland in motor caravans. The Minister for Arts, Sport and Tourism refused to answer the question, stating he had no official responsibility. The Minister for the Environment, Heritage and Local Government did likewise. The Minister for Transport responded that it was a matter for the National Roads Authority. It is not only the construction industry and the banking sector that are in trouble; the tourism industry has had its worst year for a long time. If three Ministers choose to absolve their responsibilities rather than roll up their sleeves and get stuck in when times are tough, they can only be described as wasters.

This budget did nothing to stimulate economic growth and employment. It did nothing to promote tourism or agriculture. It did nothing for the people of west Cork. Farmers are faced with the abolition of the farm installation grant and the retirement scheme, with several other cuts likely to be revealed in the coming months.

The only person with a smirk on his face last week was the former Deputy and Minister of State who now wears a hard hat. He may need a full-face helmet by the time of the next budget not only to hide his face but to protect his neck.

The fishing industry is faced with serious difficulties. I am reminded of the saying, “A rising tide raises all boats”. The fishing boats are rising and falling with every tide but they are tethered to the quay side, being unable to fish for half of the year. The budget did nothing for fishermen, who are left with less money than they had before. Where will the funding come from to assist them in repaying their huge borrowings for their super-trawlers?

The Government took the soft option of introducing 30 stealth taxes and doubling the borrowing requirement in nine months. I take this opportunity to remind them of the old saying: “Borrowing, like scratching, is only good for a while”. The Government has been found out and its days are numbered.

I am particularly concerned by the suspension of care of the elderly schemes due to a lack of finance. Will elderly citizens be left to die in their homes this winter? Cork County Council [47]alone is processing 5,000 applications for the scheme, which must now be set aside pending funding allocation. The scheme that was introduced six months ago amid much fanfare offered assurances to every senior citizen that grants would be available to assist them in upgrading their homes. Now, however, they are being left to shiver in the cold. The Government’s conduct in this matter is disgraceful.

There are many stings in the tail of this budget which will not be fully unravelled until the various Ministers have introduced all measures in the House. The increase in the pupil-teacher ratio will lead to the loss of 400 teaching jobs, 200 at primary level and 200 at secondary level. At my clinic in Skibbereen last Saturday, five constituents told me about the difficulties they have encountered in securing speech therapy for their children. Thirty minutes per week is inadequate. I spoke to the parents of a young person who had a serious palate operation and who was told by the surgeon that she needed additional therapeutic care in the school she is attending. She was allocated 30 minutes of speech therapy per fortnight. There is no evidence here of the caring Government about which we hear so much.

The Government has lost the confidence of the public throughout the State. One had only to stand on the plinth outside Leinster House yesterday to see the anger of the 15,000 elderly people who came to protest against the serious disadvantages they face as a result of the introduction of means testing of over 70s for the medical card. The Government cannot stand over its policy, a policy which was responsible for me losing my seat in 2002. The introduction of a universal entitlement to a medical card for over 70s was announced six months before that election. It achieved its objective of ensuring a majority for Fianna Fáil, but it kept me out of Dáil Éireann for another five years.

The Government’s actions are despicable. Elderly people were not told that the provision of medical cards for all over 70s was merely a temporary measure. Will there now be means testing in respect of free travel and electricity and telephone allowances? Is this the thin edge of the wedge?

I am trying to instil some knowledge in the people opposite. However, I fear my words are in vain as they are not taking any notice of what I am saying. The people will take notice during the European and county council elections. If the Government tries to introduce another referendum on the Lisbon treaty it will feel the wrath of the people.

I have been a Member of this House for the past 23 years. Never in that time have I witnessed that which I witnessed last night. The taxi driver who took me to my accommodation last night, on finding out I was a member of the Fine Gael Party, refused to take from me any payment for the journey as a gesture of goodwill to the Fine Gael Party for its stance in regard to the scandalous act of the withdrawal from persons aged over 70 years of the universal right to a medical card.

What will the Government do next? What is the position in regard to the new schools promised for the past years in Clonakilty, Kinsale, Castletownbere, Skibbereen and Bantry? The staff at these schools are teaching their pupils in totally unsuitable accommodation. Files on these projects have been sitting on desks, collecting mould, in the Department of Education and Science for the past ten years. Not one penny has been allocated to any of these projects, which is a disgrace.

[48]It is likely a further budget will be introduced in six months time given the current one was introduced only nine months after the Government took office. The Government must heed the people. If it does not, it is bound for failure.
