This budget is a vicious assault on working people and middle income families. The people who work hard, play by the rules and pay for everything have been hit very hard to pay for a decade of greed by high rollers and a decade of incompetence and profligacy by Fianna Fáil.

The budget is full of taxes, charges and levies targeted at middle Ireland, while nothing has been done to ask the high rollers to pay their fair share. This is a budget airline budget. The speech was full of high-minded waffle about patriotic action, but when one looks at the small print, one sees the taxes and charges. My colleague, Deputy Róisín Shortall, has begun to count them and has reached 30. The treacherous 30 cuts. This is where the €1 fare suddenly becomes €100. However, those in first class will not be affected.

This budget is not fair, it is mean. It does not protect the less well off, it attacks them. It gives the meanest possible increase in social welfare, cuts entitlements, and takes medical cards from elderly people. People who worked hard all their lives and paid taxes hand over fist have had the rug pulled from under them by Fianna Fáil. It does nothing to create jobs, in fact it will destroy jobs and it makes absolutely clear that the Government has learned nothing from its mistakes, but remains wedded to the same old failed developer-led economy.

Of course, to learn from its mistakes, the Government would have to admit it made any. That it refuses to do. It took it three months to admit there was any economic problem in the first place and now it claims this whole mess is someone else’s fault. Given the turmoil in international financial markets, it is easy for the Government to deflect blame elsewhere. However, if it is all to do with international problems, why is Ireland the first eurozone economy to enter into recession? If it is the fault of the international economy, why is the downturn in the Irish public finances greater than in any other country? If this is all the fault of someone else, why are we seeing the fastest ever rise in the live register, long before the international credit crunch?

[753]The truth is that this is a homegrown domestic recession brought on by failed economic management by a Government which coasted in good times and is bewildered in the new economic circumstances. When it came to office, the Government was handed an economy in excellent condition in the middle of an export boom. From 2001, however, the export boom faded to be replaced by an economy driven by a property bubble.

I cannot recall the number of times I and my Labour Party colleagues called on the Government to tackle rising house prices. Again and again we raised it but the Government refused to act. Anyone who dared question the boom was denounced. When people raised legitimate questions about the economy’s direction, particularly about the use of tax breaks to feather-bed property developers, they were denounced by the former Minister for Finance and now EU Commissioner, Charlie McCreevy, as left-wing pinkos and they advised the country to party on. Not to be outdone, the former Taoiseach, Deputy Bertie Ahern, around the same time, denounced anyone who questioned his Government’s economic strategy as a creeping Jesus. As recently as July 2007, Deputy Bertie Ahern, in an address to the ICTU conference in Bundoran, said he did not know why people who engaged in cribbing and moaning about the economy did not commit suicide.

Fianna Fáil did nothing to limit the growth in house prices. It refused to curtail speculation, to implement the Kenny report, which would have controlled the price of building lands and it remained addicted to property-based tax incentives. That is why we have a recession and why people on low and middle-incomes are being asked to pick up the tab.

There is a bailout for the banks and property speculators. There is none, however, for a young couple who took out one of those 100% mortgages now faced with higher mortgage repayments, job insecurity and being hit with a series of further tax hikes.

The only place a person in those circumstances can go for help and advice when the banks and building societies are descending on them to repay the mortgage is the Money Advice and Budgeting Service, MABS. It is interesting it is one of the State agencies to be emasculated under the guise of rationalisation. MABS will be amalgamated with the Citizens Information Board instead of being allowed to continue providing valuable, professional and independent services to people in money trouble.

It is also remarkable the Combat Poverty Agency will be hauled back into the social inclusion unit in the Department of Social and Family Affairs, the unit which gave this budget a clear bill of health yesterday. This is a case of the watchdog being withdrawn to the kennels. The Government does not want any independent voice examining how it is dealing with the plight of poor people.

When economies get into trouble, there is always a hunger for fiscal austerity. No matter where the recession starts, the first course of action is always to cut public services. The cry goes up, “Let there be pain”. Pain for whom? It will not be the stockbrokers or the bankers but the patients on trolleys in Drogheda and every other accident and emergency department. We are told the economy needs tough medicine and people are advised to take it. People on an accident and emergency trolley would happily take their medicine if they could only get seen by a doctor. We are told it is time for tough decisions, but tough for whom? It will be tough for people losing their jobs and having their entitlements cut. They are the people who will have it tough.

Ministers give lectures on the need to be responsible. The cost of their failures will fall on the hard-working women and men, already experts on responsibility because they shoulder it every day. The people who work hard, nurture others, pay for everything and play by the rules are the ones who will carry the responsibility in this budget.

[754]A family on a modest income will easily pay €2,000 more in tax as a result of this budget. A family on €60,000 will pay €734 extra in tax. A family with a child going to college will pay €600 more in fees. The Government seems not to know that the transition year exists and means many children do the leaving certificate at 18 yet child benefit for them has been abolished. If a family has a five year old, child care payment will be cut by €550. A family with medical expenses of any kind — it is not unusual for families to pay €2,000 or more in medical costs for someone who needs special care — will have its tax refund cut in half.

A family that must drive to work will pay €200 to park the car at work or pay €400 to use the park-and-ride facility at the train station. We still have to hear how this new car parking tax will be applied. Will this involve everyone who has a car parking space?

Will this apply to those who have temporary use of facilities and drive to work some days but not on others? Will they have to pay the full amount? This is an example of finding every possible means to inflict additional taxes on working people.

These same families will pay more in so-called voluntary contributions in schools because school funding has been frozen while school expenses have rocketed. They will pay more for petrol to go to work. They will pay more to visit an accident and emergency department if, by some chance, they happen to have an accident or an emergency and cannot pop into the GP on the way. They will pay 0.5% more on VAT on everything else they spend.

As they munch on their breakfast rolls this morning, the people in the commuter belt who voted Fianna Fáil back into office in large numbers have been betrayed. They will carry the can. Perhaps the best expression of the Government’s philosophy came, not from any Minister but from its devoted friend and champion, the chairman of Anglo-Irish Bank. Safely protected from the consequences of his failures by the Government guarantee and having pocketed the largest welfare cheque ever written, he was prominent in his call for pain.

Cut medical cards and child benefit, he said. If the economy were the Titanic, it would be women and children last while the bankers got the first and most comfortable lifeboat.

In Mr. Fitzpatrick’s world, which is also the world of Fianna Fáil, the Progressive Democrats and the Green Party, children and old people come last in the budget. Class sizes are getting larger. Cuts are being implemented for language support teachers, the early school leavers programme, the school books scheme, grants for youth services, while in-service development and school transport charges are being increased. After all the years of prosperity, we still do not have a preschool education programme and the early years subsidy has been cut.

Mr. Fitzpatrick must be one happy banker this morning with what has happened to the old. Pensions will increase by a mere €7 while medical cards have been removed from the over 70s. Rather than confront the vested interests in the medical profession, which made the scheme so [755]expensive, the Government has targeted the over 70s. This move will cause untold distress and anxiety for older people.

As I have repeatedly said, the problem in the public finances has been caused by the recession, not the other way around. What we needed, therefore, was a budget that would stimulate economic activity and get people back to work. Instead, we got the opposite. This is a deflationary budget, which will suck money out of the economy and reduce purchasing power. The knock-on effect will result in job losses.

This is just year one of a three-year strategy to cut the deficit by 5% of GDP. That is a severe fiscal contraction by any standards. Corrective action is necessary, but we are in the middle of an unprecedented banking crisis, which has already led to a major tightening of credit conditions in the economy. At the same time, we are facing a major international recession and downturn in international trade, which will limit exports as a source of demand. For the Government to further curtail demand will cost jobs.

One cannot compare Ireland now to the country it was in the 1980s and say that fiscal contraction is good. In the 1980s, Ireland had its own currency, whereas it is now part of the euro zone. That fact fundamentally changes the equation for budgetary policy. Our Government deficit will not affect interest rates or inflation. Given our low debt-income ratio, the macro-economic risks of Government deficits are limited. That is not to say that we can run large deficits indefinitely. I am not suggesting that, or that difficult decisions are not required, but taking 5% of GDP out of the economy over three years is very risky indeed. What is the objective? To get back to a position, by 2011, where we will once again be funding capital spending out of current income, at the expense of jobs?

This is not the time to destroy jobs, it is the time to create them, but where are the initiatives in this budget to create jobs? What is being done to find alternative employment for people who are losing their jobs? Where is the major programme of re-skilling and retraining that is needed for those 80,000 people who have joined the dole queues in the past year?

The expert group on future skills needs says that at least 500,000 people must improve their qualification levels over the next decade. Why not start now with those who are losing their jobs? Thousands of people are losing their jobs in the house building sector. They could have been put to work building schools, social housing, urban regeneration schemes or house insulation, but what did we get? The Exchequer allocation for school buildings is being cut and the insulation scheme amounts to €20 for each house that needs retro-fitting. Can nobody in the Government effectively champion the need for energy conservation? Instead of a major retraining programme being launched, the back-to-education initiative is being cut.

Two weeks ago, this Fianna Fáil-led Government wrote the biggest welfare cheque in the history of the State. Not a social welfare cheque, but a society welfare cheque. It was worth tens of billions of euro and was made payable to some of the richest people in our country — the bankers. We were told it was necessary because those same bankers lent out untold fortunes to property developers, the friends of Fianna Fáil. They are the people who pay for expensive advertising campaigns which tell voters that only Fianna Fáil can manage the economy.

The Government has been spinning hard that this budget will protect the vulnerable at the expense of the better off, but it will do nothing of the sort. Social welfare incomes have been increased by the bare minimum of 3%, in a year when the price of bread is up 17%, flour by 34%, milk by 25% and bottled gas by 15%. That is why the Society of St. Vincent de Paul called for a €15-per week increase in welfare rates. Instead, however, they got a pathetic €6.50. If somebody on social welfare is also on a rent allowance, €5 of that €6.50 will be clawed back by an increase in the minimum contribution that social welfare recipients on rent allowance are required to make to their rent payment.

[756]Increases in the fuel allowance are paltry and progress on all other social welfare areas has been stalled. The living alone allowance, a particular concern of Age Action, has been left untouched. A set of mean-spirited, unfair, harsh and unwarranted restrictions has been placed on people who have just lost their jobs and have recently signed on. These are the people who had a contract with the Government; they paid their PRSI and never expected to have to collect benefits, but now their entitlement to claim benefit has been severely restricted.

We were told that top earners would pay most, but that is simply not so. In fact, the budget booklet shows that a couple on €120,000 will pay the same, in percentage terms, as a person on €60,000. The low paid are now effectively in the tax net, wiping out the additional increase they were supposed to receive under the social partnership agreement.

The spin from the Government this morning was that Labour had introduced the same type of levy in 1993. We did so, but made sure to exempt people earning less that £170 per week, which is the equivalent of €416 today. Moreover, anyone on a medical card was exempt from the levy.

I will quote from the budget speech of the then Minister for Finance, Deputy Bertie Ahern. He may not have been socialist himself, but at that time he was surrounded by a few socialists.

The then Minister for Finance said:

The new levy will be at a rate of 1%, but with an income exemption in order to protect the lower paid. In the case of the self-employed, the exemption will apply where income for the year is not greater than £9,000. In the case of employees, the levy will not be payable in any week where the income is not greater than £173. In setting the income threshold at this level, rather than at the general tax exemption limits, the potential full-year yield for the levy is diminished by some £20 million. However, in doing so, I have ensured that a further 217,000 taxpayers will not be affected by the levy, over and above the 290,000 who are exempted from income tax.

If that same principle was applied today, it would mean that somebody on an income of approximately €30,000 a year would be exempt from the levy that was introduced here yesterday, which is of course a new form of taxation.

Once again, however, the big tax breaks and tax avoidance measures have been left untouched. Tax relief on mortgage interest for landlords remains at a cost of €572 million. Tax relief for super-private clinics, so favoured by the Minister for Health and Children, remains at a cost of €1 billion. The loophole that allows developers to avoid stamp duty on commercial property is not touched. The great tax–break for the rich in small, self-administered pension schemes remains in place.

We still have the bank bail-out, including, without any explanation, dated subordinated debt. Who holds that debt and why are they covered by the bank bail-out scheme and guarantee when no other European country has covered it? Last weekend, the Paris communiqué explicitly referred only to the coverage and protection of senior debt.

We still do not know what the great bail-out will bring to the Exchequer or what conditionality will apply. On Monday, four of the most senior bankers in the United Kingdom went to Downing street with jobs and left sacked. The only person who was sacked here last Monday was the unfortunate manager of the Galway hurling team.

[757]It is not just Ireland’s poor who will suffer. Once again, as a country, we are reneging on our commitment to the world’s poor by cutting overseas development aid. When the economy is growing, we are told that ODA cannot keep up. When the economy is not growing, we are told we cannot afford to keep our promise. If that is patriotism, then it is a pretty sad form of it.

Government Ministers are saying that cuts will not affect health, education or social welfare, but that is patently untrue. Hospital budgets are being squeezed, there is a long list of miserable cuts in education and there are severe restrictions in entitlement to social insurance. Making the poor pay is not just unfair, it is also unwise.

If one wants to take a lesson from the history of Irish social partnership, it is this: we have done best as a nation when we combined a strategy for economic growth with a determination to protect the vulnerable and share gains. However imperfect, social partnership was based on that formula. It did not go as far as many of us would have wished, but it was a powerful dynamic nonetheless.

If one looked across Europe after the oil shocks of the 1970s, it was the countries which were able to share the cost of economic downturn fairly that emerged most strongly. This budget has no strategy for growth, and contains no ethic of social solidarity. It contains a series of spending cuts, some stupid and some just simply cruel.

This is a budget from an era that is past. In recent weeks, the failings of neo-liberalism and the Washington consensus have been shown up in glorious technicolour. For years, those who have argued for equality and solidarity in our society have been confronted by a rigid right-wing orthodoxy. The simple and simplistic view of history was that there was no more left and right, there was only right; that regulation should be light, or better avoided altogether; that the market was the only system that could efficiently deliver any economic or social need; that financial markets were the ultimate expression of market efficiency; that greed was good; that a small, and ever shrinking state was the only road map for future prosperity; that European civilisation, with its regulated market and strong social spending was a fossil from another era; and that global capitalism was incompatible with social solidarity and inequality.

It turns out that the conservative, monetarist orthodoxy is spectacularly wrong. Those assumptions have been turned on their head. Deregulation, it turns out, can be a recipe for risky, and sometimes down-right dishonest practices which can put jobs, business and homes at risk. Markets, particularly financial markets, are often irrational, and unregulated financial markets can bring the world to the brink of economic meltdown. Greed, in the form of a hedge fund, can bring down a bank and destroy jobs in the real economy. Government, it turns out, has a role to play after all. If the neo-liberals had their way, there would not have been enough Government left to organise the bailout. The European social model, though requiring reform, provides a basis for stable sustainable growth, coupled with equality.

For years, when the left argued that executive pay was grossly out of control, we were scoffed at. One could not possibly restrict the pay of these masters of the Universe or the world would come crashing down around our ears. Guess what, the world very nearly came crashing down around our ears, and it may not be over yet.

Where now are all those people who told us that inequality was a good thing, that it provided the right incentives in the economy? Inequality is at the heart of the sub-prime crisis that gave rise to the economic difficulties in the first place. When the investment bankers ran out of developing countries to which to lend money, they found a Third World country in the heart of the world’s greatest economic power, in the United States. Working-class America had seen its income stagnate since the 1980s of Reagan, and they were the ideal target for sub-prime lending. The international economic crisis had its roots in income inequality.

[758]Political economy is back. Equality is not an optional extra or a drain on growth. It is a basic requirement of a civilised society and of economic progress. The decisions made in this budget matter to real people in the here and now. In the run-up to this budget, there has been a clamour for hair-shirts, so long as someone else wears them. The Government, it is argued, must manage its affairs like a family or a business, and balance its budget. That, too, was the philosophy that informed Government responses to the Great Depression of the 1930s. It was that same conservative view that pushed the world into depression — bail out the bankers, and hammer those who pay their taxes and play by the rules.

On Sunday last, the Minister for Finance quoted President Franklin Delano Roosevelt, when he said that the only thing we have to fear is fear itself. Like all quotations used out of context, it can be used to justify anything but what the author had originally intended. It is worth me finishing by reminding the House of some of the rest of that same speech, FDR’s inaugural. It is worth remembering because it shows how the struggle for decency is always with us. President Roosevelt stated:

. . . let me assert my firm belief that the only thing we have to fear, is fear itself — nameless, unreasoning, unjustified terror which paralyses needed efforts to convert retreat into advance.

. . . Plenty is at our doorstep, but a generous use of it languishes in the very sight of the supply. Primarily this is because the rulers of the exchange of mankind’s goods have failed, through their own stubbornness and their own incompetence,

. . . Practices of the unscrupulous money changers stand indicted in the court of public opinion, rejected in the hearts and minds of men.

. . . They know only the rules of a generation of self-seekers. They have no vision, and where there is no vision the people perish.

The money changers have fled from their high seats in the temple of our civilisation. We may now restore that temple to the ancient truths. The measure of the restoration lies in the extent to which we apply social values more noble than mere monetary profit.

Let me repeat:

The measure of the restoration lies in the extent to which we apply social values more noble than mere monetary profit.

I repeat that sentence because it underlines the approach the Labour Party in Ireland is taking to our present economic circumstances, just as it underlines the approach being taken by FDR’s successor, Senator Obama across the Atlantic.

President Roosevelt further stated:

Our greatest primary task is to put people to work. This is no unsolvable problem if we face it wisely and courageously. . . .

There was no New Deal in this budget. There was no attempt to create jobs. Instead, there was an attack on old people, on poor people, and a vicious assault on working and middle income families.

I challenge the Government to put this budget to the test of the people. There is a vacancy in this House. There is a by-election due in the constituency of Dublin South. I challenge the Government to move the writ for that by-election to hold it now so that at least the people of [759]that constituency can give their verdict on what the Government is doing and on the lies the Government told the people just over 12 months ago when they were re-elected to office.
