Deputy Barrett proposed that Baldonnel Airport should be used as an international airport.

He referred to it being used as a commercial airport of some description.

His colleague, Senator Fitzgerald, may have something to say about that. Deputy Barrett dismissively suggested that I should busy myself in twiddling with my laptop. That is precisely what I did during the conclusion of his speech. I used the time to respond to constituents and also to do some searching via Google, which yielded two interesting articles from the Sunday Independent of 14 January 2007. These relate how a confidential document shown to the newspaper indicated that Deputy Kenny and Fine Gael rejected plans to develop a second airport at Baldonnel while in government 11 years ago. The article notes that this revelation comes “as the country’s main Opposition party leader pledged to build a second airport in the west Dublin area if elected Taoiseach this summer”. Deputy Kenny has made a similar suggestion in regard to Westin Aerodrome, which is in my constituency, before executing a U-turn after coming under pressure from Senator Fitzgerald. Therefore, I respectfully suggest that Deputy Barrett discuss the matter with his party leader before floating his ideas for Baldonnel Airport. My constituency colleague, Senator Fitzgerald, will have much to say about the matter.

I enjoy a debate. However, I will proceed to talk about the budget. I welcome the changes to the income levy and to the medical card scheme for the over 70s. I worked with my Green Party colleagues to secure changes to the original plan once the stress, hurt and anxiety being caused to elderly people became apparent. I take this opportunity to apologise personally to my constituents for any hurt or distress caused to them and for which I am collectively responsible.

Since the announcement of the attention to withdraw universal provision of medical cards to over 70s, I have made various suggestions in writing to the Minister for Health and Children, Deputy Harney, and the Minister for Finance, Deputy Brian Lenihan, as to how the moneys involved might otherwise be saved. I also wrote to the Minister for Arts, Sport and Tourism, Deputy Cullen, to suggest that the greyhound and horse racing fund, which amounts to some €70 million in this year’s budget, be diverted. That particular fund accounts for almost one third of sports funding which might be better allocated elsewhere, such as minority sports, swimming pool programmes and so on. In my constituency, for example, Collinstown Park Community College’s sports hall faces the possibility of closure, as does Pobalscoil Isolde’s public community facility. As I said in my letter to the Minister, a root and branch analysis of these profitable industries — horse racing and greyhound racing — might be helpful. The latter is associated with a significant degree of wanton cruelty. Such an analysis might indicate a capacity for self-funding. If some Exchequer funding is required, I would suggest the introduction of a betting tax.

I propose to deal mainly with the education provisions in the budget. We all must acknowledge that this could never have been other than a very difficult budget. Growth for this year is -1.5%, with an expected rate of -0.75% in 2009. That situation has not arisen, as I understand it, since the 1980s. While I was only a child in the 1980s, I knew times were tough. Once again, we must prepare for tough times.

There has been much comment in regard to the Minister for Finance’s call to patriotic duty. I am happy to answer that call and to act in solidarity in regard to the collective hard times facing us. However, let this not be seen as my condoning certain aspects of the budget which, I believe, could have been better and could be improved. The Green Party made representations in regard to medical cards and is currently making representations in regard to the education budget. In a few minutes I will read into the record an open letter to the Minister for Education and Science, Deputy Batt O’Keeffe, in regard to the cutbacks I am unhappy about and from where possibly this money can be recouped.

In the meantime, as a Green Party Member I very much welcome the protection extended to local government funding in terms of the 19% increase in water funding, the strong green measures within the budget, the retention of a number of public transport initiatives, substantial increases in social welfare spending, the ongoing progress of the carbon budget and increases in indirect taxes on petrol, which I welcome, and on tobacco. I believe more could have been done in regard to alcohol and betting but I will deal later with these issues.

I welcome the airport departure tax as a painless way of raising revenue. Reference was made only a few minutes ago to Weston and Baldonnel airports. It strikes me as odd that private airports are not subject to a similar tax. Perhaps the more well-off travellers taking off [827]from and landing at these airports should be asked to pay a higher levy. I would welcome an initiative in this regard.

My colleague, the Minister for Communications, Energy and Natural Resources, Deputy Eamon Ryan, will bring forth a raft of measures in the coming weeks to build on the progress made last year in regard to energy, including tax allowances for the purchase of sophisticated equipment for electricity provision and more efficient data server systems. I welcome the ending of decentralisation and the costs associated with same. I stated that I welcome the social welfare allowances, including the €10 increase in the threshold for the family income supplement.

I want to deal with education. There is much to welcome in the education budget. While I am conscious the increase in the budget for the Department of Education and Science was not enough, it is one of three Departments that received an increase. There are some measures worth welcoming, including the €80 million increase in the allocation for 2008 on the capital side. This includes €581 million for the schools capital programme which is, unfortunately, marginally down to a figure of €586 million. However, it will allow the Department, as the Minister outlined, to complete 26 major projects, commence construction on a further 62 projects and meet the requirements of 100 other smaller projects.

I welcome the 44% increase in third level funding and the increase in research and development. I pay tribute on the substantive increase in capitation funding by €21.42 at primary level, giving a total of €200 per pupil, which is real progress, and the continuing progress on the second level side. I welcome the additional €10 million to fund and enhance measures for children with special educational needs pending full implementation of the Education for People with Special Educational Needs Act. I regret that Act has not yet been implemented and I concur with the remarks made by Opposition Deputies in that regard. The increase of €40 million to cover the full-year costs of additional special needs assistants is also welcome.

While one cannot criticise the entire education budget, some valid concerns have been raised. I am aware the Minister for Education and Science, Deputy Batt O’Keeffe, is in China. I will e-mail the following letter to him later. It is an open letter which I will read into the record lest anyone thinks I am not willing to go on the public record in respect of this matter.


I have been in touch with the Minister. Members heard my budget speech last year. I am not afraid to put my money where my mouth is. I will read the letter following which Deputies will have an opportunity to respond to it.


The letter reads:

Dear Minister O’ Keeffe,

[828]
I have not until today been given the opportunity to comment publicly on the Education Budget and to put my feelings onto the Dail record.

We are living in tough economic times and I do admire your ability to stand firm in the face of public criticism of the difficult but necessary budgetary constraints you have been placed under.

The letter continues:

However I cannot in all credibility stand by some of the proposals made by your Department. I welcome many of the progressive elements of the Education budget, which I alluded to earlier in my contribution. But I must take issue with many of the cutbacks.

Sometimes a decision is just plain wrong and in this context I am asking you and the Minister for Finance to revisit some of the more questionable cuts to our Education service.

For many years, both as a member of a Government party and in opposition I have been unwavering in my calls for education to be taken seriously and given the funding it deserves.

I do not have to repeat what I have said about education being a building block for future prosperity and social cohesion and the collective failure of the body politic — Government and opposition — to give real commitments to education so that we may reap the real rewards, albeit in some cases beyond the narrow five year electoral cycle. Funding education pays back in so many ways. And making cuts in the wrong place can cause irreparable damage.

The letter continues:

Having been consistent in my calls for much greater education funding, I must once again say that we have missed an investment opportunity. Additional borrowing or additional income tax could have provided the necessary leverage to take advantage of any change in economic circumstances.

However I am not so optimistic as to hope beyond hope that this Government or indeed any potential Government is suddenly going to wake up with a messiahanic zeal for turbo charged educational investment. At this stage all I can hope for is that the hardest hitting of the educational cuts can be reversed and funding found from other sources.

A response in this manner would show that this Government will listen and respond to the cries for help that are now coming from teachers working on the ground and the parents of the children they teach.

The letter continues:

We responded to one vulnerable part of our society over the medical cards issue. We responded in relation to the income levy for those on the minimum wage. Now we must [829]respond, proactively, on a number of areas, if not to increase funding, but at least to try and maintain the status quo.

Class sizes is the single biggest issue. Various figures have been bandied about ranging from the 400 overall cuts you have suggested, to a figure of over a thousand at each level by the teaching unions.

I think at a minimum in these times of dwindling state revenues, we must ensure that the pupil teacher ratio is not reversed. It should be further increased but in the worst case scenario, it must remain at current levels at both primary and second level.

Taking an average figure for retaining the ratio which ignores the higher wages of retiring teachers, I estimate that the total cost of keeping the class size average of 27 per class at primary and 18 per class at post primary is in the region of €151 million.

Another area that has been cut back is in the area of school books. This to me is an essential part of a child’s development and in this context the €7.5 million cost for school book aid and the €2.19 million in library grants has to be reversed. The figures are so small relatively, but the impact goes way beyond that.

I am surprised Minister and disappointed that the €97,000 for the Centre for Talented Youth has been cut. By all means carry out a cost benefit analysis, but to curtail a service that enhances and encourages our best and brightest who could have a major role to play in our future development does not make sense, particularly for such a paltry sum.

Speaking of Youth, our Youth Services were bracing themselves for no real increase in their budget, but little did they imagine that their budgets would be cut. This €4.4 million cutback will have a devastating effect on frontline provision which will well outweigh the saving. Again it needs to be reinstated.

Similarly the €8.5 million grabbed out of the Back to Education initiative is a regressive step when this facility will be needed by more and more people. Under the current proposal 500 people will be affected, 500 who could be major net tax contributors in a few years time.

The Education Welfare Board should at least have had its current funding retained, for the sake of €120,000. If anything this should be increased of course, given its important role.

Then there are the amalgamated grants to post-primary schools, including those for choirs and orchestras, home economics, physics and chemistry, the junior certificate schools programme, leaving certificate applied, LCVP and transition year. These combined will save the state €5.35 million but will actually probably cost the state more in the long run.


The letter further continues:

There are other issues that I would like you to reconsider including Traveller Education funding, after a review of outcomes has been carried out. Not to mention a reassurance that the special protection afforded to the minority Protestant Education community is not being stripped away by the regulation of the situation vis a vis the majority Catholic fee paying schools.

The letter continues:

[830]
And I could go on. One does not like the increase in registration fees, even in the current economic circumstance. However this is nothing compared to my views on the reintroduction of third level fees. But I suppose I will finish with the decision to amend substitution cover for absences arising from uncertified sick leave in all schools, as well as for school business absences in post-primary schools. This needs to be reviewed. I have not been able to work out how much will actually be saved here in not employing substitutes without certification. But if one assumes it will cost no more than €5 million annually, what about the loss to the educational welfare of our children? By all means investigate absenteeism but come back next year with a more focused proposal that does not affect front line services.

To briefly break from reading the letter to the Minister, I am sure all of us as Deputies have been receiving e-mails about how these frontline services will be cut according to the schools in question. There is an element of pressure but there is also a real truth behind those figures.

I return to the letter:

The amount of savings referred to above by my calculations comes to an approximate total of €184 million. I do not have the information to be entirely accurate, but assuming the general thrust is correct, would you not agree, Minister O’Keeffe, that if funding can be found elsewhere, these cutbacks could and should be reversed?

I hope he will be up for days.

The letter continues:

I suggest, for example, adding a travel surcharge to private jets or increasing the second home tax by a measly €100 euro. What about increasing the levy on incomes over €200,000 or placing more on the cigarettes? I was amused to see one of the headlines refer to the pint as having been saved in the budget. Slap more excise duty on the pint of plain if it means extra funding for our children any day. And what about the dogs and horses grant referred to earlier, although I would prefer if that went towards minority sports? I was also interested to hear about savings in Minister O’Dea’s Department. Is any of this up for grabs?

It continues:

Specific suggestions include:

Halving the reductions in stamp duty on commercial properties, which would raise €90 million. Reverse the reduction in the charge on ATM cards from €5.00 to €2.50, which would raise €14 million. Redirect 10% of the home choice loan fund of €500 million, which would raise €50 million.

[831]The letter continues:

According to CSO figures on second properties, the levy of €200 should bring in €80 million rather than €40 million as estimated in the budget summary, which frees up an additional €40 million.

The total of these suggestions equals €194 million, which exceeds the cost of the cutbacks. And if any specific suggestion is unpalatable to any specific Minister, there are more suggestions that can be made in relation to the general taxation, the PRSI, an increased income levy etc.

To once again take a brief break from the letter to the Minister, constituents to whom I spoke on the medical card issue have indicated they are more than willing to take up some of the flak in hard economic times but they do not want the young or the elderly to be affected.

The letter concludes:

Thank you for taking the time to read this letter, Minister. I hope you will have the courage and the common sense to work with the Minister for Finance and other colleagues to redress these damaging cutbacks by obtaining the funds from other sources. It is not a capitulation to take a position but change it in the light of new information regarding the impact of such a position. I would say, Minister, it takes more courage to reverse the cutbacks than it does to defend them. You have already shown yourself well able to tackle various interest groups. However our children are a particularly special interest group who cannot speak up for themselves.

I conclude:

Make the right decision Minister. Reverse the most damaging cutbacks.

Yours sincerely,

Paul Gogarty TD, Green Party Education Spokesperson, Chair of the Joint Oireachtas Committee on Education and Science.
