It is about protecting to the greatest extent possible the progress that Ireland has made over the past decade. It is about ensuring that Ireland has a solid basis for economic recovery when world economic conditions improve. Every Deputy in the House, stepping outside the confines of adversarial party politics, recognises that we are in extraordinary economic circumstances. The global economic and financial climate means we face stark choices. If we do not make the right choices there will be catastrophic consequences for the future prospects of the economy and we will threaten the livelihood of current and future generations of people.

The turmoil in international financial markets provides the backdrop against which this budget has been framed. No one yet knows the full extent of these adverse developments or how quickly stability can be restored. It is not credible to suggest that any government could ensure the winds of global recession which are battering at the door of every other nation would by-pass this country. We must deal with realities as they are, not as we might like them to be. Ireland is an open economy and we depend on exports as a major driver of our economic success. In good times we benefited more than proportionally from the benign world conditions. In these difficult times we are being severely impacted by these stormy international conditions. The first requirement, therefore, is to seek to stabilise the current situation and chart a pathway back to economic recovery in the coming years.

Unprecedented times call for unprecedented measures. The first such measure was to bring the budget forward from the usual December date to yesterday. Fiscal stability has been central to Ireland’s economic success of recent years. It has been the firm foundation for building an enterprising economy which rewards hard work but also has a strong social provision. The second major decision was to take decisive action to secure our banking system. We need a strong banking system to support our economy and to support hard-pressed families and businesses.

Up to this year, the economy was growing year on year and hundreds of thousands of jobs were created, which brought in increased tax. We used that money to reform our income tax system and reduce tax on workers and businesses and invested heavily to address the underinvestment of the past by providing better public services in health, education, social welfare and other areas, and investing in capital infrastructure to build up the country and meet the demands of a growing country. While doing all this, we put more than €20 billion into the National Pensions Reserve Fund to help provide for the future and we halved the national debt in a decade. That decade is now over and those improvements are there for all to see. We made sure that more working families retained a greater part of their income than was ever the case before.

[736]This year, the rapid slowdown in the global economy and the downturn in the housing market have dramatically reduced the revenue available to run public services. The 2009 budget is the most crucial budget in modern times. Our tax revenues this year were significantly less than budgeted for because of the sharp slowdown in economic activity. In 2007, we achieved 6% growth and this year growth has contracted by approximately 1.5%. To deal with this sharp deterioration in public finances as a result of that reduced activity, we have chosen a direction based not on soft options, quick fixes or political expediency. Sound and stable public finances are a prerequisite to the delivery of long-term economic and social improvements.

The approach has to be sufficient to restore stability, yet measured such that it does not accelerate the economic slowdown. The budget arithmetic achieves this balance through a combination of targeted reductions in spending and measured approaches to increasing revenue. It addresses the budgetary challenge in 2009 and, importantly, paves the way for healthier and more sustainable fiscal outturns in the years ahead.

We are raising tax revenue by close on €2 billion in net terms to keep within our financial targets and we are cutting expenditure. Significantly, we will have to continue to work to reduce the current budget deficit which will stand at more than €4.7 billion even after the budget changes.

On the capital side we are still investing heavily in Ireland’s future. The priorities of the national development plan have been maintained. The pace of improvement, evident in recent years, will continue. Taking direct Exchequer funding of €8.2 billion and a public private partnership contribution of somewhat less than €1 billion, total capital investment next year will be €9.2 billion or 5.4% of gross national product. This is in keeping with our commitment in the national development plan to keep capital spending during these years at between 5% and 6% of gross national product. In the past, all our capital spending came out of cash surpluses. Now we have to borrow, but that is totally defensible because of the economic rate of return we receive from the investment we envisage in the next year on capital. This is prioritising the spend on areas where there is an economic return in the short term on transport and environmental infrastructure and in the longer term in respect of education and research and development investment. This significant investment in transport, research and development, environmental services and communications will enhance the competitiveness of our economy and drive future economic progress.

Given the very rapid increase in expenditure on services in the past ten years, it is not unreasonable that we should reduce the pace of growth in the short term, when this is clearly in our long-term interest. In this period of global economic crisis, it is easy to lose sight of what Ireland has achieved. We must consolidate that now and build for the future by continuing to invest so that we can increase productivity and be more competitive.

When times were good, we invested wisely in schools, roads, public transport——

——communications and housing, giving us one of the highest rates of public investment in Europe. We dramatically increased the State pension for our elderly and child benefit for our working families. We increased the number of gardaí, teachers, doctors, nurses and people helping our special children in education and health.

The average industrial wage has also risen substantially. There are now more than 2 million people working in the country despite rises in unemployment during the past year, and, unfortunately, further rises in unemployment are predicted next year. Our completion rates for second and third level education are among the highest in the European Union. It is a key priority to protect this solid base of achievement to the greatest extent we possibly can in these circumstances.

We are determined to keep our focus on making sure that we come out of these difficult times as quickly and strongly as we can.

If there is one thing we should all learn from the past, it is that the worst policy of all and the one which causes the most damage to people is to pretend that tough action can be taken without people feeling the impact.

The only way to provide quality public services and to maximise support for the less well off is to get us back to strong public finances as quickly as feasible and take the actions required to achieve that objective. With revenues down €6.5 billion this year, it would simply not be responsible if we did not adapt the level of public services being provided. Policy changes had to be considered and had to take account of the fact that the Government will have less revenue next year than was anticipated before the international downturn hit us.

We must take a balanced approach, significantly reducing the rate of expenditure on current day-to-day spending from 10% this year to 3.8% next year, by deferring discretionary capital spending, including holding off on further land acquisition and building on the decentralisation programme until the 6,000 public servants who are ready to relocate are in place in the next couple of years. We also had to consider and make decisions on raising taxes by €2 billion in net terms to end up with a general government deficit which is still high at 6.5% of gross domestic product.

The Fine Gael finance spokesman said last night that Fine Gael would not raise taxes but would bring in a budget with a 5.5% deficit. That can only mean it is in favour of further expenditure cuts totalling more than €4 billion because to reduce the deficit from 6.5% to 5.5% would cost more than €2 billion and Deputy Bruton disagrees with our tax raising measures which cost another €2 billion.

To do that — people are entitled to put their alternatives to the House — would simply devastate public service delivery——

——and would involve making political decisions at this time which would simply be untenable. I agree we must move to eliminate the current budget deficit to finally establish a long-term sustainable path, whereby day-to-day expenditure corresponds to tax receipts. As tax revenues are 10% less than expected for this year, with little improvement in that position assumed for next year, that can only be done progressively over time.

[738]I wish to comment further on the matter raised by Deputy Gilmore during Leaders’ Questions. I am conscious of the sacrifices people will make as a result of yesterday’s budget. If we begin a process of correction now and stick with it in the years ahead, we will provide the best means of protecting our prosperity and supporting the vulnerable in the years to come. We have done our utmost to adhere to the principle of fairness in making our budgetary decisions. When money is less plentiful, we must divert it to those who are most in need. The contributions people make to the cost of public services must be structured in line with their ability to pay.

We have increased the income tax band to ensure that workers on modest incomes do not pay tax at the higher rate as a result of standard pay increases. We have structured the necessary income levy to ensure that those on higher incomes will pay more. We have capped the tax benefits of pension contributions at a significantly reduced level of earnings. In that way, we will ensure we do not provide subsidies to those who are not in need. People on modest incomes are sheltered from the necessary increases in charges. The criticisms of the income levy from Opposition Deputies ring hollow when one considers that when they were in office——

——they used to charge people on similar low and modest incomes 26% on every £1 they earned beyond the first £84 a week.


Since that time, when the Opposition parties charged a 26% rate, we have introduced reforms to the tax system which have taken 500,000 workers out of the tax net altogether.

The Opposition parties imposed a 26% charge when they were in government, whereas we are asking for a 1% levy at these difficult times. The system we propose will ensure that those on high incomes will pay the levy on their gross income and cannot shelter that income from the levy. That is progressive — as one earns more, one pays more. If we [739]were to increase tax rates, for example, by adding 1% to the standard band and 2% to the higher band, we would not accrue the volume of money required, or achieve the outcome the levy will achieve.

We are providing a package of over €515 million to protect pensioners and other social welfare recipients from the effects of inflation. There is a widespread acceptance that expenditure on child benefit does not achieve an appropriate degree of balance. Therefore, it is right to signal the phasing out of child benefit in respect of 18 year olds in full-time education. Young people from families that depend on social welfare are specifically taken into account in the compensatory measures announced by the Minister, however. Similarly, the changes announced in respect of the medical card for people over the age of 70 are not unreasonable. The entire older population, with the exception of 5% of them who have the highest incomes, will continue to have access to a medical card, a doctor-only card or a grant towards GP expenses. Of every 100 older people, 94 will get a medical card, a doctor’s card or the €400 grant. The rest of them will not qualify because they have a pension of more than €650 per week. The contributory State pension is €230.30 per week and the non-contributory pension is €219 per week.

The Government will enable progress to be continued in developing all levels of the education system in an appropriate manner. It will increase capitation grants, expenditure on research and development capacity at third level and specific supports for children at school with disabilities. The budget also delivers on our commitment to use fiscal mechanisms to encourage environmental improvement. The credibility and success of the Government’s budgetary strategy is increased when the behaviour of people across the economy reflects and reinforces the underlying approach to budgetary choices. The budget is compatible with the social partnership process and the draft agreement. It secures stability in the public finances, defends those who are most vulnerable and distributes the burden of adjustment as fairly as possible. I ask for the support of the social partners in navigating through this difficult time for their members and the rest of the country.

The decisions announced yesterday will have specific implications for the public service. It has been suggested that there has been an unreasonable and excessive explosion in public service numbers, but the facts suggest otherwise. While Ireland compares well to other OECD countries in this regard, present circumstances require that we achieve more for less. We are not interested in merely being in line with OECD averages in terms of staffing levels and performance. We must move from average to best. We must display the highest rates of productivity increase, the strongest indicators of quality outcomes, the smartest application of new technologies and the closest attention to the diverse needs of our citizens. At a time of severe economic and fiscal challenge, the efficiency and effectiveness with which public services are organised and delivered is critically important. The budget reflects the decisions the Government has already taken to focus spending on areas of greatest priority and to reduce sharply activities which are not essential in the present circumstances. We intend to reduce significantly expenditure on consultancies and to curtail severely expenditure on advertising and other support activities. Measures to transform the management of procurement across the public service are also in train and will yield significant savings.

There is clear and overwhelming evidence that our public servants deeply resent the fact that under-performance is tolerated and protected. They are frustrated, as others are, when their practical experience of service delivery is not reflected in the development of policy. There is great talent and an impatience for reform in many quarters of the public service. We need to liberate that talent and fast-track the process of reform. Pressure of resources can [740]contribute to the creative solution to these challenges. The budget provides for a 4% reduction in the public service payroll, relative to 2008. This challenging target will be built on with targets for further efficiency gains over subsequent years. Our public servants are relatively well paid. In return, they must accept the need for openness to change and innovation on a par with the most competitive aspects of the private sector. They must show flexibility and be willing to meet the rigours of performance management and external accountability. In their deployment and activity, they must focus on the service of the citizen, which is what matters the most.

The modernisation of the public service and the drive for greater efficiency and effectiveness were the Government’s central requirements during the recent negotiations on a new public service pay agreement. The full and comprehensive delivery of that agenda is central to the policies and priorities of this Administration. The public service and its trade unions recognise that the public deserves and demands nothing less than a full and transparent renewal of the public service, at all levels and in all sectors. In the weeks to come, the Minister for Finance and I will announce specific measures arising from the work of the task force on public sector reform. There will be a rigorous appraisal of staffing levels, underpinned by external expertise, so that public service managers are supported in their efforts to ensure that available resources are appropriately aligned with priority needs. This can be achieved in partnership by applying the terms of the draft agreement that was negotiated recently. In any event, such changes are essential and will be pursued vigorously by the Government. The decision by the members of the Government and the Secretaries General of the various Departments to waive voluntarily 10% of their income was a symbolic move rather than a gimmick.

Symbolic gestures are important in a community of citizens. We build our civic culture through actions which underline our intentions and our meaning. In this instance, our intention was to show our appreciation of the difficult times many of our citizens will experience in the period ahead. The gesture is an acknowledgement that, in a small society, we depend on each other. Each of us depends on the efforts and supports of others. I refer to people in the public and private sectors; workers and employers; and people who have recently arrived in this country and those who are rooted in a strong local Irish identity. The impact of change and challenge in the months to come will depend on how well we can reflect the common good in our actions and decisions. One thing that is certain, as we face the most serious global economic circumstances for almost a century, is that these times will pass.

When that happens, Ireland needs to be in a position to take advantage. I want to make it clear that Ireland’s future is bright. It has been said that the only safe ship in a storm is leadership.

This Government will show leadership by managing the economy through this international downturn and on to a path to economic recovery. A time of serious adversity can be a time of great opportunity. In the cycle of any economy, there is a time for renewal and change. The basis for this economic renewal will be the achievements of the past ten years. Yet during difficult times it is tempting to batten down the hatches and wait until the storm is [741]over before figuring out where to go next. However, we must not and we will not have our attention diverted from putting in place the necessary building blocks so that Ireland can take advantage of the inevitable upswing in the global economy.

In the current challenging circumstances, the Government is acutely aware of the key role of business in driving economic growth and providing secure, quality employment. Ireland has enjoyed extraordinary economic success, in part as a result of providing a highly favourable business environment. The latest World Doing Business report ranks us seventh out of 182 countries as a place to do business, the fifth easiest place to establish a business and the third cheapest location for business start-up regulation.

Nevertheless, the Government is absolutely committed to measures to build on this success.

One of the important messages of this budget is that Ireland is very much open for business. Despite the severe financial and economic difficulties emerging across the global economy, there is still a strong enterprise sector which is world-class in its capacity and performance. It is underpinned by the rapidly-evolving scientific, technological and innovation base that is at the heart of our enterprise policy. With access to a highly-skilled and flexible labour force, this enterprise economy is well placed for further growth and development. For that reason, it is essential that we maintain an attractive environment for overseas investment, especially in the more innovative and higher value-added sectors of the global economy.

With that in mind, I will be travelling to China next week as part of our overall efforts to sustain and develop new market opportunities for Ireland and Irish companies. China is increasingly becoming one of the most significant markets globally, and appears to be better positioned than many to see out the current economic difficulties. I will have a bilateral meeting with Chinese Prime Minister Wen Jiabao and I expect to discuss the continued development of bilateral relations between our two countries. I will lead a trade development mission of over 100 Irish companies, all of whom are expanding their trading opportunities in China. We will also be exploring opportunities for greater Chinese investment in Ireland.

Of equal importance to foreign direct investment is the stimulation of business start-ups and the expansion of indigenous enterprise. A particular priority is development which captures the full economic benefit of the knowledge and innovation created with the support of public investment in education and research and development.

In looking to the future, we can take confidence from the past. The basis of Ireland’s past economic growth is also that which will fuel our future recovery, namely, the talent of our own people. Our people will always be the most critical ingredient in our performance. We have one of the youngest and best educated workforces in Europe. It is their ingenuity and creativity which will drive the next phase of Ireland’s economic development. That is the Irish advantage, and we must never lose it. Building the stock of knowledge and know-how is critical. The budget’s increased support for investment in research and development through the corporate tax system, as well as the incentives for companies in their early years to retain profits to invest in development, are strategically important. Combined with our commitment to the continuing rapid development of a competitive infrastructure, it is clear that the Government remains strongly pro-enterprise and that this is a pro-enterprise budget.

We will continue to consider measures to encourage further research and development, as well as innovation and commercialisation by private enterprise. This will enable Ireland to move up the value chain so that we assert ourselves not only as an open enterprise economy, but also an open entrepreneurial economy. This is a crucial basis for our future economic and [742]social development. A great lesson from the last century of Irish history is that self-sufficiency and protectionism are outmoded economic ideologies. This country, as a small island, must face outwards. For our people to prosper, we need international markets, foreign investment and strong trading links.

It would be wrong of me, in the context of the current difficult economic times, not to mention my strongly held view that our prospects are absolutely interwoven with our membership of and participation in the European Union. Our membership of the euro has facilitated a diversification of trade, a reduction in the costs of business transactions, and a stable interest rate and currency environment. The European Central Bank is playing a vital role in supporting banks through measures such as the provision of credit and the recent interest rate reduction. On Sunday, the euro zone countries agreed on a comprehensive suite of measures to enable each of them to take action in a co-ordinated manner, but tailored to suit their specific circumstances.

I firmly believe that Ireland must remain at the heart of Europe. We advance our interests not by going solo, but by working with like-minded others on problems, challenges and opportunities that can only be dealt with effectively by working across national borders. Pooling our sovereignty with others is not the same as giving it away, but in any relationship of mutual interdependence, there must be give and take. We should not place ourselves in a position where our European partners view us as obstructing the progress they might wish to see for themselves, without properly assessing the consequences for us. Unfortunately, the result of our referendum on the Lisbon treaty has the potential to do just that. I will resolutely lead our efforts to address the concerns expressed during the referendum not just for Europe, but for Ireland within Europe. I am convinced that our economic and social well-being will be better served by such a resolution, especially in the troubled times in which we find ourselves.

We must learn from our past experiences during difficult economic times. The business of government is about making choices. I have great confidence in the wisdom of the Irish people to take the long-term view and understand why we have made the difficult choices that we have made. The alternatives were more unpalatable. The future prosperity of our people is the Government’s primary concern. Ireland has a good economic future beyond the current difficulties. Our actions this week and in the coming weeks and months will provide the basis for Ireland’s economic recovery from this recession. The Irish people have faced considerable adversity in the past and yet our creativity, ingenuity, patriotism and sense of purpose have delivered great success, and will deliver it again.

I wish to state clearly that the Government has chosen its course. No matter how difficult the decisions, we will not waiver from acting in the long-term interests of current and future generations. I believe that the budget presented by the Minister for Finance provides a clear policy direction, a set of specific measures, and a framework of principles to guide us in the period ahead. I ask the Irish people to stay the course, and with hard work and determination, we will get through these difficult times and onto a path towards economic recovery and renewal.
