I thank the Ceann Comhairle for giving me the opportunity to speak on this important budget at a critical time for the country’s finances. We all know the budget was introduced in the context of a severe economic downturn, with income tax revenues down €6.5 billion in the current year. We must take cognisance of this fact.

While my colleagues and I agree that last week was difficult for backbench Deputies, I am greatly relieved by this morning’s decision to change the budget measures on medical cards.

Under the measures that have been announced, more than 95% of deserving people will retain their medical cards. The new income thresholds widen the net enormously to take into account the huge proportion of our elderly who deserve our support and have always got it. Under the new arrangements, single people can now earn up to €700 a week, equating to €36,500 in a year. That excludes any savings they may have, and they still retain their medical card. Married couples can now earn up to €1,400 per week, equivalent to €73,000 per annum, again excluding their savings. For those who might not qualify under those income limits, there is the discretionary scheme, which has always been in place for those with severe medical needs and costs.

The newly announced system is more straightforward, in my view, and I sincerely hope today’s developments will reduce the anxiety felt by members of the public in the past week.

Fianna Fáil has long looked after the interests of the elderly, more than any other party in this House. I thought it interesting that our Fine Gael colleague from Kildare was talking about the derisory figure of £1.40 that the revered MEP, Mr. Proinsias de Rossa, gave when he was Minister for Social Welfare. That was a severe embarrassment to Fine Gael and the Labour Party and the less said from that side of the House, the better.

I remind our colleagues in Opposition that not alone has the Minister increased the figure by €7 this year, but it is now €230 per week on top of all the other free items senior citizens are given. We should recognise that Fianna Fáil, in successive [324]Governments over the last number of years, has substantially increased the benefits to our senior citizens. I challenge anybody from Fine Gael and Labour to dispute that fact.

In lobbying hard last week for the changes to the medical card, I was conscious of the enormous number of views being expressed to me and, indeed, to all Deputies. As a Fianna Fáil backbencher I broadly welcome the changes now made to the medical card.

I certainly made my views known on the matter and believe that today’s announcement has resolved the concerns of the vast majority of the people. We now have a much more equitable solution. As a Fianna Fáil Deputy and a life-long supporter of my party, it is my duty to represent the views of close to 11,000 people who gave me their first preferences in the general election of May 2007. I thank them for that and had no compunction in expressing their concerns to the Taoiseach, the Minister for Finance and the Minister for Health and Children. I am relieved that my representations and those of my backbench colleagues have helped to resolve the situation. The measures announced this morning are fair and equitable and will achieve what the Government was attempting to do, in the first place, that is, to save the State a substantial amount of money.

I am delighted that the Government is to take this issue to the GPs. I mentioned this last week, and as we know Deputy Reilly went berserk when I suggested that the IMO had a role to play. I certainly believe that was always the way we should go to get better value on behalf of the taxpayers of this State, from the IMO. Quite clearly, the figures were very much in its members’ favour. It was good to hear a doctor on last night’s “Questions and Answers” agree that the average number of visits per patient is six, when they are getting paid for up to 13 visits per year. A 50% saving is badly needed there and the Government is to be congratulated on those negotiations. I look forward to the result of this consultation and I have faith in the Government to make the required savings by addressing the deal with the GPs.

I want to take a moment to acknowledge the contribution of my constituency colleague, Deputy James Reilly who, as a revered former section head of the IMO, was responsible for the medical gold card scheme, which is now emerging as a major expense to the Government. I ask, specifically, as I did last week, whether he will give his blessing to his former GP colleagues in the IMO voluntarily reducing the costs to the Government of treating these elderly medical card holders. We should recall Deputy Reilly’s comments as regards the universality of the scheme when it was originally announced. I shall quote from some of his comments when he was chairman of the GP section of the IMO. He said he “would not like to see cards given out to those who could afford golf clubs”. I assume he was talking about higher subscription golf clubs. In 2001 he said he “would not like to see [medical] cards given out to senior civil servants, retired or otherwise, judges, Ministers, high-powered property tycoons, hospital consultants...”. Equally, I want to remind him of an article, dated 16 December 2007, in The Sunday Business Post, at which stage he was a Dáil Deputy and not acting under his previous guise as a chairman of the IMO’s GP section. In the second last paragraph of the article written by Aileen O’Meara, Deputy Reilly is quoted as saying he “does not want millionaire over-70s to be given cards”. I regard his attitude and that of Fine Gael on the issue of giving medical cards to millionaire over-70s to be absolutely hypocritical. It is disgusting how someone such as Deputy Reilly can somersault in his attitudes for the sake of sheer naked political opportunism. I hope he will address the issue and allude to that fact when he speaks tonight, as I presume he will, as spokesman for Fine Gael, on the Private Members’ Bill. I should like to hear his justification as regards what he believes in 2008, when this country has severe financial [325]constraints compared to 2001-02 when it was trading well and garnering a good deal of taxable income. I want him to answer those queries because I believe that he, and his colleagues in Fine Gael, have been hypocritical. Moving on——

Fine Gael is confusing the public and deliberately misconstruing the situation. That is the only point I am making.

We have to deal with measures to bridge the gap between the State’s current income and expected revenue. Some €3 billion is needed to run the country for the next year, and there is no point in denying it or rewriting history. No more than previous Fianna Fáil-led Administrations, Fine Gael-Labour Governments were equally bad in terms of increasing the national debt and creating problems. We need money now and the general public recognises the next two or three years will be difficult and is willing to make its contribution. However, matters are not helped when people on the other side say that extra taxation is not needed. I do not pretend that I am an economist, but I have been a businessman and so know something about it. Eminent economists argue that if the Fine Gael proposals were implemented, we should be borrowing an extra €4 billion on top of what the Government is planning. We should recognise that our GDP will decline by 1.5% next year and a further decline is on the cards for the following year. We know that €2 billion of this money will come from taxation measures and a further €1 billion will be garnered from savings on public spending. Everyone in the House expects savings across the public service. We have all had difficulties, whether with the HSE or other bodies. I welcome the fact the Government will tackle this problem.

Income from taxation will primarily come from the 1% income levy. That levy is fair and equitable. However, I welcome today’s confirmation by the Taoiseach that those on lower incomes will be excluded from this. Higher earners, those earning over €250,000 per annum, should pay a higher figure than the 2%. I suggest 2.5% or 3%. I hope when the Minister brings forward the Finance Bill, he might incorporate that because higher earners have done well out of this country, they are not afraid to pay up and they are willing to make their contribution.

I mentioned old age pensioners earlier. The €7 increase, bringing the pension to €230 per week, is important. Most of the people I have met over the past number of years recognise that they have been well treated. They are quite happy with the increases they have been getting year on year. From my discussions with people, I believe they are happy they are getting an extra €7 in the coming year considering the state of the public finances. They recognise that as much as the rest of us do.

The levies will certainly pay for the 5% increase in the mortgage interest relief for first-time buyers. That is a very important facet. These people need help in these difficult times and it will allow them to claim up to €416 per month which is significant.

I am particularly pleased with the transportation issues. Deputy Broughan will agree with me in regard to metro north which will benefit his constituency, even though it does not run through it. The area north of the Liffey, including Meath and south Louth, needs a public transportation system comparable to the Luas on the southside. We need an efficient and cost-[326]effective method of public transport. Every morning the M1 motorway coming into Dublin city is clogged up. We need to take those 20,000 cars off the road for future sustainability, to reduce CO2 emissions, etc. All the sceptics, including Deputy Broughan, were half hoping that metro north would not be in this year’s programme. Deputy Broughan could have——

——blamed the Government even though his constituents, whether they vote for Fianna Fáil, Fine Gael, the Labour Party, etc., were clearly telling him they wanted the metro. No project has ever been so widely welcomed by the public——

I am only stating the facts. Deputy Broughan and his colleagues would have berated the Minister if he had excluded metro north. It is in this programme. I hope those opposite will acknowledge that because when I read the Northside People and see Deputy Broughan’s comments about metro north, sometimes I want to cringe and tell the people what he says at the Joint Oireachtas Committee on Transport.

Metro west will follow. Let us get metro north to the airport so that metro west can come about. Metro west will happen when public finances allow. Again, it is badly needed. Deputy Broughan knows Transport 21 is a substantial €34 billion programme. Most of it is intact. Many of the items in Transport 21 have been delivered.

I refer to our new roadway structure. One can drive from Dublin to Cork, from Dublin to Galway and from Dublin to Sligo.

We will come to the buses. Let us deal with Transport 21 about which Deputy Broughan is so sceptical. We have delivered on the vast majority of the road programme in recent years ahead of time and ahead of budget.

Deputy Barrett should look at the record. I am talking about recent projects coming in ahead of budget and ahead of schedule. That is a fact. If he doubts it, the Deputy should look at the record. The NRA will confirm that and I am sure Deputy Broughan will do so too because he asked the NRA quite recently about its programmes.

I travel on as many roads as Deputy Broughan. I had the pleasure of driving from Galway to Dublin recently in two and a half hours and it did not involve breaking the speed limit. That is indicative of the progress we are making.

In regard to education issues, we all regret an increase in the pupil-teacher ratio but we must live with the reality of the financial constraints. I listened to the Fine Gael Deputy from Kildare North talk about education.

[327]He never mentioned the 19,000 extra teachers and special needs assistants who have been put into our schools in the past three to four years. He did not even have the guts to admit that there has been a substantial building programme, including in Deputy Broughan’s constituency and in my constituency of Dublin North. Major news schools have been announced and, more important, built in the past number of years. Does Deputy Broughan want me to name them? There are extra schools in Balbriggan, Skerries, Rush, Lusk, Swords and Donabate. Does Deputy Broughan want me to name the schools in Dublin North-East?

I will leave Deputy Broughan to deal with Dublin North-East. There has been a substantial programme. One must be realistic in terms of what we can do at this point.

In regard to class sizes, there are exceptions to every rule and I will focus, in particular, on schools with large numbers of foreign national pupils in their midst whose command of English is not too good. We need to put extra language teachers into those schools and I will ask the Minister to deal with that issue in a very flexible and considerate manner.

We want to reduce numbers going forward and as money permits. We have good school buildings and a teacher-pupil ratio of 28:1. Most of us in this House went to schools with a pupil-teacher ratio of 35:1 or 40:1, or at least I certainly did and it did not do me any harm. There were 35 pupils in my children’s classes and they all went to college and got degrees, masters’ degrees, etc., which I did not.

I do not believe the pupil-teacher ratio is a major problem. We have quality teachers and I trust them to deliver a good education, as they have done over the years. That is our hope. The odd school will have problems and I recognise that it should be helped. However, for the next couple of years, we will live with a pupil-teacher ratio of 28:1. I do not believe there should be any arguments in that regard.

As a Deputy for Dublin North, one of the emerging locations for new business and research and development, I welcome the tax credits which the Minister has introduced in the budget. A sum of €335 million has been provided for research and development. That makes Ireland competitive in the global knowledge economy and it is an increase of 3% on last year, which is very welcome. When one considers that the current budget is nine times the investment we made in 2000, it is substantial and recognises the role the Government sees for business. I wish the Taoiseach and the business delegation travelling to China well in their efforts to bring business and badly needed jobs to our country. We need to encourage as many overseas companies as possible to set up research facilities on these shores.

I realise Deputy Broughan suffers slight embarrassment at the progress the country has made under Fianna Fáil Governments. I will not give out to him for barracking, because that is all he can do. I am sure he will not have too much to say.

I will continue with my speech if the Deputy does not mind, but if I have time, I will revert to that later.

[328]At this point in time, it was necessary to have a tough budget. It is in the country’s interest that we get our public finances back in order and bring competitiveness back into business. We must use every opportunity to educate the public about the current downturn and to warn them that the high expectations of the past must be tempered and lowered. The public should not be conned into believing that everything is rosy in the garden and that the Opposition would deal with the current situation better. Economists have told us that if the Fine Gael proposals enunciated in recent weeks were adopted, we would need to borrow an extra €4 billion. One can imagine the impact that would have on our economy, on jobs, on taxpayers and our GP cards.

Sacrifice is needed from all sections of society to maintain stability so that we will be in a position, when the global economy improves, to reintegrate our aims into Government policies and future budgets. In 1987, when the country suffered certain financial constraints, the Minister of the day, Ray MacSharry, took tough decisions. At the time, the people felt the measures taken were tough, but hindsight proved the decisions taken to be correct. It was no different in 2004 when once again tough decisions had to be made. Tough decisions were made then in the national interest.

As we discuss this 2009 budget, I believe we need to make tough decisions. We need to tell the public in clear, simple language the difficulties we have with our finances. We are €6.5 billion down this year and expect to be €9 billion down next year. This must be stated clearly so that the public understands why we must take tough decisions in the budget. If we do not, we will find great difficulty in getting ourselves back on track and being ready for the upturn in 2011.

With regard to the current financial situation, it must be recognised that Ireland is not the only country suffering a downturn. The whole world has gone through turmoil. There is a downturn in the global economy. We are aware of the situation with regard to the US banks and sub-prime lending and the difficulties it caused for the US, us, our neighbours in Britain and our European counterparts. We did not bring that upon ourselves. It was foisted upon us. Opposition spokespersons have commented that Ireland brought these troubles on itself, but our banks were not immune from the problem in the United States.

Ireland showed great leadership in bringing forward its bank bail-out legislation. We were the first to step in and say we would guarantee the savings of depositors. That was the right decision. It was done in the interest of stability and we got stability because of taking that decision. It is interesting that our European counterparts, some of whom criticised our decision at the time, have said it was the right way to go.

Let me say to Deputy Broughan that the members of his party are hypocrites. They had the chance to wear the green national jersey on that legislation. However, they tried to stop it being introduced.

At least Fine Gael supported the legislation, because it knew there was no alternative. The stance taken by the Labour Party in voting against the legislation was ridiculous. The Labour Party is proud to be anti-national.

[329]It is proud to say it would let our economy sink, but even my salary and that of Deputy Broughan depend on a viable banking institution. Deputy Broughan is proud of the Labour Party stance, but he needs to reconsider his philosophy.

There is transparency. The Minister complied with requests from all sections of the House in terms of putting directors on the boards and ensuring transparency.

The Labour Party members should hang their heads in shame. They let the country down and said they would not let the legislation come into the House. They wanted to knock it. Even last week, when the Minister’s plans came before the House, including provisions for transparency, the Labour Party would not vote for it.

Shame on the Labour Party, it let the side down.

The Labour Party had the opportunity to show how big it is and that it recognised the interests of the small people as well as the big. It failed miserably to take that opportunity. Much as we would all like to have seen the fat cats suffer, we need a banking system. America, Britain and all of Europe need a banking system. When the Labour Party has time to reflect on what it has done, it will regret it. The country needed the Labour Party members to stand up and be counted, but they failed to do that.

The budget is tough, but it is the right budget at this time. I hope that in a couple of years, when the global economy picks up, we will be ready to get back on the fast track, create jobs, create wealth, give extra money to our old pensioners and provide good jobs at low tax rates to our citizens.
