I agree with my constituency colleague that when times are tough, tough decisions must be made. I remember that some years ago, such tough decisions were made by Governments, only to be voted down over small technicalities. I can remember that not much support was forthcoming from the Opposition during the BSE crisis. The only thing done was that people were dragged through this House in the worst possible situation.

[834]While the Taoiseach and the Government have tried to hide their miserable performance behind the international banking crisis, no one can deny that in two years, they have brought this country from being €6 billion in surplus to its present position in which it is €15 billion in debt. Unquestionably, this is a remarkable achievement and certainly constitutes a record within the European Union.

On 24 April 2007, the Taoiseach advised people how he, as Minister for Finance, had brought about such a successful economy and claimed full responsibility for it. Consequently, he now must take full responsibility for the current disaster. While addressing the Federation of International Banks in Ireland on that date, he stated:

Our economy is stronger than at any time in our country’s history. The fear of unemployment has been replaced with the reality of good jobs paying good wages and offering good prospects. . . . We live in truly exceptional times.

He further advised that the Government would:

invest in education, skills and infrastructure to raise productivity, to enhance competitiveness and protect prosperity, reduce taxes to reward work, promote enterprise and spread the burden fairly across society [and] increase spending on services to improve the lives of citizens.

How could things have gone so badly wrong?

In recent weeks, the people of Ireland have been indoctrinated through the media to expect a harsh budget and were assured by different Government spokespersons that it would take the necessary steps to bring about a recovery. While the Taoiseach consistently advised that the Government would deal with the overstaffing of the HSE and other organisations, he has opted out completely from any responsibility for curtailing costs and has opted solely for a budget that ensures a cost to every individual, regardless of how little they earn.

I believe this budget will cost a family that earns €60,000 per annum an additional €2,500 between indirect taxes and direct charges. While I wrote the following comment a few days ago, it is still relevant. Possibly the most difficult cut of all is what was done to those who are over 70. The excuses proffered by the Taoiseach and other Ministers about not understanding the position of those over 70 and putting them and their families through such trauma in recent days are nothing but a complete disgrace. The feelings of those people about how they were let down by the Government were to be seen outside Leinster House today. While I welcome the U-turn, it did not go far enough. It should have involved a complete reversion to the previous system. I also welcome the U-turn in respect of the 1% levy. This also was a measure that, good bad or indifferent, was not thought out.

It must be remembered that when the scheme for the over 70s was brought into being in 2002 for election purposes, the then Minister for Health and Children advised that the scheme would cost between €17 million and €19 million. I heard the Taoiseach remark recently that he had thought it would only cost €15 million. However, in the scheme’s first year of operation, it cost €57 million, due to mismanagement and an inability to deal on behalf of the public. In general, health cuts clearly will have a serious effect on the aged and disabled. The fair deal proposal again has been put on hold for up to 12 months and no two members of the Cabinet can give the same advice on what will happen to those needing long-term care in the meantime.

In the limited time I have available, I must condemn the closure of the Army barracks in Monaghan. It has served our country well during one of the most delicate periods in the history [835]of our State. While the Good Friday Agreement and the St. Andrews Agreement have improved the situation dramatically in the North and the Border areas, one has only to recall the tragic death of Paul Quinn 12 months ago, the efforts in recent months to take the lives of PSNI personnel and the closure due to a bomb threat of the main road from Clones to Cavan at Wattle Bridge to realise the continuing need for proper security. It is cause for further concern that it is proposed to transfer personnel from Monaghan to either Athlone or Dundalk. The failure to mention Cavan barracks, which is the nearest base, raises questions regarding its long-term prospects. I visited Monaghan barracks on numerous occasions, most recently last Saturday. Dundalk barracks must be a marvellous facility if, as Deputy Conlon suggests, it is an improvement on Monaghan. She must not have visited Monaghan barracks because it is a first-class base which I hope will continue to be used. It is located on a valuable 20-acre site. Why are all the barracks due for closure located in the north of the country? None is located in the Minister for Defence’s constituency or, for example, in Clonmel.

As a representative of counties Cavan and Monaghan, which have a proud record in agriculture, I am extremely disappointed with the removal of the early retirement pension scheme and the young farmers installation grant, as well as the payment reductions under the disadvantaged areas scheme. The new suckler cow scheme is not even in place. In light of the amount of red tape with which farmers must contend, how can any Government Deputy claim that the schemes will still be worthwhile after being cut by 50%? The money will not even be sufficient to pay them for the difficulties they face. Deputy Connaughton will be able to outline these issues more clearly. The cuts in farming generally will be in the order of €3,500 to commercial farmers. That is extremely serious.

It is difficult for farmers to understand that the Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Food failed to get an extension for slurry spreading until the end of the year, which is the period achieved for their counterparts across the Border in Northern Ireland. Clearly, the Green Party has once gain made its influence felt, and not for the good of farming or the environment.

Cavan-Monaghan has lost out under the decentralisation programme. While it was clear from the beginning there was no chance that the Combat Poverty Agency would come to Monaghan town, the loss of 85 jobs in Carrickmacross and 250 in Cavan will have serious consequences during a turn-down in industry and job creation generally. It is interesting to note that decentralisation will come up for review in 2011, which is some time before the next election. Fine Gael has always been in favour of decentralisation provided it is properly organised rather than done purely for political purposes and without pre-consultation. Furthermore, everyone living in rural Ireland will be hit by the increased costs associated with buying, taxing and running cars. The increase of 8 cent on a litre of petrol cannot be justified and may lead to further losses of revenue in the Border areas.

The closure of Monaghan Army barracks is one matter but the almost certain closure of Monaghan General Hospital from tomorrow is quite another. It is nothing short of a disgrace. The Government at least had the guts to change the regulations on medical cards for the over 70s. People have died while Monaghan hospital was previously off call because they could not reach alternative hospitals in time. As the party in power, Fianna Fáil can decide whether the Minister for Health and Children, Deputy Harney, will allow the hospital to remain open and it has one more chance to do so. I urge the Minister to stop the meeting from proceeding tomorrow and ensure that the people of Monaghan retain their service. We were guaranteed that alternative services of equal or better quality would be made available before Monaghan hospital was closed or downgraded, but that guarantee has not been met. We will be given four beds in Cavan hospital to replace 58, including an intensive care ward, in Monaghan. My colleagues from Ennis and Galway, Deputies Breen and Connaughton, respectively, will have [836]to deal with similar issues if the Government is not stopped from breaking down our services even as it wastes our money on major increases in administration.

