I welcome the opportunity to say a few words on this budget. The budget should be judged in terms of its effects in a particular context. It was brought forward for a particular reason, to respond to international economic circumstances which had changed. While those who prepared the budget have used these external circumstances as a kind of apologia for their actions, there is no doubt but that there has been a crisis in fiscal terms here since 2006.

The reason I say the crisis has been with us since 2006 is because I want to talk about real economics. In 2006, our imports exceeded exports. Without being partisan about it, between 1995 and 2000 the economy performed well in terms of growth, which was sustained by export growth. Exports then flattened out and dipped in 2006 after which imports exceeded exports resulting in a serious balance of payments problem. It is not accidental that in approximately January 2007 property prices reached their peak. There was an international bubble and within that a home-grown bubble based particularly on property speculation and also fed by a series of instruments that could be regarded as virtual financial products. Some people suggest these were invented in the United States and sub-prime lending spread through the international [330]system and made its way into the Irish banks. I do not accept that excuse. There were serious failings in regulation by the Financial Regulator and the Central Bank.

Those responsible for economic policy promoted the kind of property speculation we had. In time, people will look back at the McCreevy budgets as the most irresponsible of all time in being totally indiscriminate in the consequences created by tax breaks. While there was an international atmosphere, there is also that for which we have responsibility. This was brought home to me very dramatically when I was in Westland Row church this morning looking at frail elderly people coming up to stand behind a microphone to state they had worked all their lives. In some cases, women said they had retired from the Civil Service and were, therefore, in a particularly vulnerable pension position. They might have got a lump sum and reared their children. How are they now to purchase on a private market the health security people want?

I have been thinking about what is at stake here. It is the loss of citizenship by the Government action. The previous Taoiseach announced some kind of campaign which was supposed to be about citizenship, but turned into a lacklustre appeal for more volunteerism. It was not citizenship in any sense. Citizenship is about inclusion. Amartya Sen, the Nobel laureate in economics, once said that the purpose of economics was “the ability to appear in public without shame”. Genuine citizenship is about inclusion and that is the debate about universalism. We make universal provision for those who want to come in and out of citizen participation in their society. This is why we should have universal provision for children in education, etc., in order to give all citizens a chance to be able to participate in society without shame and to be able to earn a living. There is a debate in philosophy that I cannot deal with in 15 minutes as to whether this should be based on capabilities.

At the other end, people want security. Having spent their lives working, they want to be assured. While they are not looking for material benefits, they want to know, if they have need or are ill, that they would be able to have access. Those who came to Westland Row this morning wanted to be secure in regard to health needs. Apart from everything else, this makes practical sense. On average, a person lives for three years after going into a nursing home. I was a sociologist in another life. The proportion of people who want to spend their final years in their own home has never sunk below 80% in any survey. People want to be at home. While some of people never used them, the knowledge that if they felt unwell they could use their medical cards and go to a pharmacy with which they had a relationship served as a kind of instrument of security.

These two ends of the spectrum are represented by the elderly and children in education. It is a pity that the previous speaker is not here. A woman spoke about the school in which she works in Tallaght. That school, in which almost 50% of the children have difficulty with English, is losing two language teachers. Nobody wants that to happen and it should not happen. However, there is a great laziness about this budget. When I was a Minister, the message would come from the Department of Finance that I needed to prepare my budget on a no-change basis. The Department of Finance would always come back for the second round in which it suggested it needed a cut of a particular percentage. This has all the marks of that lazy indiscriminate thinking with no flexibility or discretion for, for example, the school that with half its pupils——

There will be many announcements. I intend to——

I will return to it. If there is flexibility in that case, I welcome it. However, how can it be progressive to increase class sizes? One might say that this is what we can afford. The Minister of State can disagree with me if he wishes, but I want to be practical about the matter. If the Government wanted to have some kind of citizenship that would be positive, it would have put a rights ring around certain categories of the population — children in education and the elderly. It would have used education for this reason. If I accepted the Minister of State’s logic, young people are going into an economic space where it will be far more difficult to get employment. It will be more insecure employment and they will change jobs far more often during their lives. Therefore, they will need more personal, social and professional skills. It makes sense to invest in education. For those who are losing their jobs, it makes sense to reduce the obstacles on the social welfare side to enable people to get back to education. That did not happen. It also made sense to have upskilling. There is a series of things I could mention. The budget fell indiscriminately on an entire category of people.

It is very interesting to give an example of an uncaring bureaucracy in my limited time. The elderly are not getting a hit for the first time. Regarding the handover of responsibility for the special housing aid for the elderly scheme from the HSE to local authorities, I was informed on 19 September 2008 about the western side of things. Initially the local authorities claimed to be responsible for the physical side of adapting a house, but nothing else to do with elderly care. The HSE letter stated:

During these meetings we outlined the number of staff involved in administering the scheme, methods used by us in assessing the applications? We informed them that we received 468 applications in 2008 of which 100 are for the City? There are 387 applications outstanding. We also explained that our current financial resources have been committed for 2008. Additionally we provided details of our Community Employment schemes. [It wanted to maintain them.]

Both Local Authorities explained that they currently have no funds available to administer the scheme and would not be in a position to accept any of our applications. In fact, Galway County Council asked us to accept 270/280 applications from them. This was refused in view of the current pressures.

At present we have ceased accepting all Applications and are referring applicants to Galway City and County Councils even though we are aware that they do not have the resources available.

The letter is signed by the local HSE representative. What way is that to treat elderly people at the very bottom of the pile? What did these people want? They wanted a downstairs toilet. They wanted to be able to wash themselves — basic requirements. The issue of the medical card was just a symptom of how elderly people are not regarded as a category of citizens that should be ring-fenced in terms of rights for the sake of security for the elderly. The same is true of the other end. Irrespective of the government in power, it should be investing in education not just for the economy, but also to have a kind of citizenship that is caring, has values of inclusion, avoids all of the different attacks we have seen on the social fabric and so forth. The budget missed all that.

I refer to the admissions that have been made. President Sarkozy referred to the necessity for another Bretton Woods Agreement to stabilise international finance. The reality is that [332]what he is not saying is that the old game has failed. Hundreds of economists have written subscribing to the liberal model of the Washington consensus that emanated in the University of Chicago where a tower will be erected shortly to Milton Friedman. That model has brought the world to its knees financially to a point rather like that addressed by John Maynard Keynes in his time. There is need for a new international institution to stand alongside the IMF and the World Bank but it should deal with hot money, speculative money and the drugs money flowing through the system and it should be built on a social model.

The future of politics, which is very interesting, is between those in the Cato Institute who argue that the last thing they want is regulation and those who want regulation to achieve a social economy. The beauty of Europe in its time was that we might have had a region with a set of economies that would advance the social model and stand against the other regions that wanted unregulated labour markets and to drive social protection down, which is important.

Those of us who have been involved in development aid and so on visit and observe countries now and again. At the same time speculation was taking place in the international economy, neat agglomerations were managing to construct conditions of oligopoly and monopoly. I attended the world hunger meeting in the Royal Hospital Kilmainham last week. In the food sector, five companies control 90% of the world’s grain trade, six companies control 80% of the world’s pesticide market, three companies control 85% of the world’s team market, two companies control 50% of the world trade in bananas, three companies control 80% of the confectionery market and, most important, the media have been monopolised. We have, therefore, a bad economic model internationally, which has failed, compliant economists who are stuck with one model and media, which are monopolised such that through Fox Television and Berlusconi one will hear the same failed song all the time.

World poverty will result. When one comes to the quality of the debate about economics domestically, people think it is a casual consequence that there are such things as good times and bad times. Good times mean there is no difference between a time as far back as 2001-02 when the Government was exporting and sustaining an economic growth rate and the current time in which exports have disappeared and become expensive for a number of reasons. The Government continued to claim a growth rate when it was revaluing the property base of the entire country and when, in five budgets in a row, it transferred benefits worth hundreds of millions of euro to people to continue the speculative madness that put housing out of the reach of ordinary people but created vast personal fortunes.

I refer to measures that could have been taken and, in particular, one that has not been mentioned so far. With regard to multiple house ownership, the person who has acquired an additional house will be charged €200 and an employee who is provided with a parking space by his or her employer will be also charged €200. Why not increase the charge for a second house to €400 and make it geometric for the third, fourth and fifth houses until over a five-year period an owner of seven or eight houses would face a penalty of 60% or 70% if necessary? That would release housing units into the market and reduce their price, thereby helping people in the housing market and it would have been a hell of a lot better than saying to those who tore the heart out of the economy on a speculative basis, “Is there anything we can give you now to keep you in business?” While the problem emanated abroad, we had our own problem and it was dealt with disgracefully. We must not allow the old and the young to carry the burden of reconstruction. That must fall on those who created the problem.

