This draconian budget should not be happening today. It is happening, however, because Fianna Fáil failed to heed the warnings and drove this economy on to the rocks. Even now, the thinking behind this budget is short-sighted. It is sucking us into a cycle of more job losses and higher debt. People will hurt badly after this budget, people who had no hand, act or part in creating the problem that we now face.

This is a jobless and a joyless budget. It offers no vision that would rebuild confidence, it serves only to get the Taoiseach and his Ministers to the end of this week.

The only way to break out of the cycle that has been created is with a convincing jobs strategy and that strategy is simply missing. This requires real leadership from Government. We saw that sort of real leadership 50 years ago from Lemass and Whitaker, who offered a clear vision of how Ireland could be different, who had the determination and the courage to take action to overcome vested interests, to confront problems with bold vision. Such vision is sadly absent from their successors. That is the tragedy we face today.

Many will feel the force of this budget pushing them down. None, however, will nurture the belief that it will put the country back on its feet. We expected to hear Ministers lead by example. The supposed cut of 15% in Ministers’ pay and 20% in the Taoiseach’s pay is a sham. It ignores the 10% we were told they were taking in April. The truth is that the real cut Ministers are taking is 5%. By comparison, someone earning €45,000 in the public service is expected to take a bigger cut than Ministers. Those on social welfare with two children are expected to take a bigger proportionate cut than Ministers. This is a deception.

We are still waiting to hear from the Minister what Anglo Irish Bank will suck out of next year’s budget, an issue on which he has remained deafeningly silent.

People are approaching this budget with anger and fear. They are angry about the warnings that were not heeded and the prevarication that failed to address problems. They are angry at the negligence that underpinned this and that no one has been held to account for the catastrophic failures that have brought us to this pass. They are fearful for their futures and the futures of their children.

They expected to see in the budget the start of a real transformation, an attempt to transform politics, to transform our economy and public service, all with the purpose of creating jobs. That is what people expected and they have been dismally disappointed by what we have seen today.

Instead of the Minister taking the radical steps to recondition an engine that this Government has brought to a standstill, ordinary people are being told to get out and push. That is not fair and is not sufficiently visionary to address the scale of the problems we now face.

The actions taken in today’s budget will do more to prolong this recession than to shorten it. Once again, we see the Minister go back to the old reliable of slashing investment not only this year and last year, but next year and the following year. We have never seen an economy come out of depression by slashing investment, the sort of investment that should be creating infrastructure fit for a modern age. The Minister is standing back and allowing that infrastructure to be neglected.

The Minister is failing to confront the cost problems that are dragging business down. Where is the radical idea to cut PRSI on employers, to give those employers who are hanging on by their fingernails a chance to survive and to see out this Christmas in the hope of something better in the new year? The Minister has failed those employers.

The Minister is also pretending the credit problem is solved and setting up a review. The people did not want to hear that; they wanted to see concrete action that would transform the credit situation. The banks came in here last week and told us the transfer of money to NAMA would not make a cent of difference to availability of credit. That is a catastrophe that will destroy strong businesses, businesses that will be sucked down by the failure of credit.

The Minister is ducking the challenges we face by offering an accountant’s budget. This budget is a recipe for staying in this hole for the next year, looking to the same people for the same sacrifices — the carer, the family struggling on low income and the public servant on low income. That is what the Minister for Finance has dressed up today as a positive contribution. The truth is that creating and sustaining employment should have been the be-all and end-all of this budget. That is the sole challenge we have to face. It would have been a far more fitting tribute to President Kennedy to have tried to stem emigration from this country than to come up with a shallow gesture of recognition. In the past two years 12% of Irish employment in business has disappeared, 22% of people, one in five, have taken a cut in their working hours. Some 90% of those job losses have hit people under the age of 30. These are the people who are carrying the can of the bad management of this economy. Those young people are the building blocks for the future. We cannot afford to allow, by the Minister’s inactivity, those people fall prey to unemployment and emigration as occurred in the past. This budget is one where his courage has failed him. He has refused to take on the challenge of recreating a strong economy in Ireland. That could have been done by the type of policies our party has put forward, a radical programme to bring in private money to invest in the infrastructures we need to get out of the hole we are in.

We need a modern electricity network, a strong broadband system, a modern water system and we need to put sound energy efficient systems into our housing and building stock. These are things we need and the money is not there to provide them unless the Minister creates a vehicle to drive it. He has stepped back and failed in that area. That is the tragedy.

We should have seen the Minister start to address the challenge of regaining the competitiveness of Ireland and that has failed. He has offered the rhetoric of the smart economy. I heard him use words such as e-enabled, renewably resourced, smartly networked, carefully husbanded. These are words that trip off the lips of Ministers but the truth is that 40% of the water we produce leaks out of the system. We have 5% of the broadband speeds of our competitors. We fail to realise the potential of renewable energy compared to countries that do not have a fraction of what we have available to us. That is a failure of vision. It is possible for the Minister to address those issues if he had the vision to do it but that vision has failed him.

We have to break out of this vicious cycle in the public finances. Slide rule accountancy will not crack it. The Minister has made provision today for €4 billion in cuts but the 75,000 extra people he forecast will be on the dole will cost €1.5 billion in lost revenue, re-impacting the deficit. He has admitted that interest on the debt will rise by €2 billion next year, that is €3.5 billion of the €4 billion that he has pushed people so hard to deliver, has just been wiped away. We are in a vicious cycle that we are not breaking out of because the Minister sees only the narrow issue of correcting the public finances and not the wider issue of addressing the economic weakness and how we rebuild our economic strength. That has failed us in this budget.

The Minister surely had to face up to the situation regarding Anglo Irish Bank. The dogs in the street say that €6 billion will be needed for the bank during the course of this year. Where is that provided for in this budget? One cannot pretend it will come from thin air. It has to be provided for and we have to budget for it. We have to know where it will come from and if it will be added to the national debt? It is not credible until the Minister addresses those issues.

At the end of this budget the Minister will borrow close to last year’s amount. We will be funding an incredible 29% of our net current spending on tick, on borrowing, which is an appalling figure. That is what the Minister has achieved having asked so many people to take pain. By 2013 his own predictions say that 71% of our income tax will be absorbed in paying interest, that is 71% of the sacrifices people make to pay income tax will be wiped away. That is a cycle the Minister has to break but it can only be broken if he has a strategy to address economic growth.

The Minister talks about having better economic growth and says the worst is over. That is a like George Bush announcing “Mission accomplished” when he went to Iraq. The truth is that these numbers are purely speculative. He has not addressed the strategies that can bring us that growth, create the employment opportunities, give us the competitive infrastructures and bring down costs. That is the tragedy. Restoring confidence is vital to our recovery. People will not invest if they are fearful and they are fearful. The Minister has forecast that next year private investment will fall by 40%, a catastrophic figure. It illustrates that people are not confident the Government has a strategy that will bring this economy on a road where they can see where they are heading and have a credible belief in what is being done. We cannot break the cycle if investors and families do not have the confidence to go out and spend. That is the position we are in. One needs more than vacuous claims that the worst is over, one needs to see action, a strategy, a plan. That is the void that has been left unaddressed.

Front-line services have been hit hard in this budget because the Minister was not willing to face up to the much more radical change demanded by the McCarthy report. That is the incredible part of it. The Minister commissioned a report that demanded that he address issues. Some 43 rationalisations were identified by the McCarthy process and not one of them has been taken on. I suppose that is not surprising because in last year’s budget the Minister announced that there were to be 30 rationalisations involving 41 agencies. What happened? Half of them have not been touched. The total savings to date from those rationalisations is €3.4 million, less than 1.5% of the budgets involved. The Minister has failed to create the tools to make rationalisation happen. He has failed to move staff from where they are not needed to where they are needed. He does not have a system for doing that and he does not have the tools to give managers the power to rationalise the way they do their business. He has left it to the 11th hour to try to address those changes. We come back to this budget and see that the focus has been on the front line and not on the changes we should have seen. These changes will be hard on people.

The Minister is asking people on the drug refund scheme to pay €120 per month whereas at the last general election the amount was €85. He is asking people on medical cards to pay 50 cent per prescription. In the UK when such a cost was introduced it exempted the lowest one-third of the income profile. Patients do not decide what is prescribed on their medical chit, doctors decide that. That patients on €180 per week, according to the means test, are being asked to pay up to €10 per month will not save us on our drugs bill. To do that one has to be radical about using generic drugs and look at new prescribing practices, not asking the weakest in our community to contribute.

The Minister is asking carers who are saving the State a fortune to take a cut of €8.50 in the amount of money they receive. Where is the fairness in that? He is asking widows and invalids to take that cut, simply because they are under the age of 65. Why were such people not exempted? The value of the work of a carer, for which the Minister will pay €212 per week, runs to €1,000 per week. That is what a carer means to a family, and it does not mean simply a monetary saving. It means that the patient is in an environment in which he or she wants to be and getting the care they want.

The Minister needed more imagination. He has hit people who are down. The fact that he has hit child payments is very short-sighted because young families have borne the brunt of the recession. They are the people who paid excess prices for houses in the upswing and are now in negative equity. Some 35,000 of them face repossessions. There are 350,000 families in negative equity and the Minister’s gesture to them is inadequate, it is pathetic. Where is the work of the Government group that was address these problems?

We were told in the programme for Government that this would be a priority but this has not been reflected in the budget. What other group is more important than families who are under threat of losing their homes? We expected to see provision for them and we expected to see the needs of the victims of this recession addressed. The Minister has provided for 26,000 job placements for the 420,000 who are out of work and this is welcome but far more welcome would be a radical economic plan to drive employment growth. Fine Gael’s economic plan to do this builds to a potential of 175,000 jobs after four years. That is the sort of vision we needed, the sort of commitment that was possible for the Minister to take on. He has short-changed people who ought to have been at the heart of this budget. Time and again we have heard the former Minister for Finance, Deputy Cowen and again as Taoiseach, talking about the seismic shift of reform in the public service. We have heard all the rhetoric but it has produced nothing. Today we see the evidence of this. The McCarthy report set out cuts that could be achieved in the area of social welfare and there was a shock and a sharp intake of breath from people who hoped we would not be reduced to such action. The report also looked at areas other than social welfare; it considered efficiencies in the spending system and in rationalisation. The Minister has adopted none of the rationalisation. What is worse, he has adopted 42% of the savings on the social welfare side but only 25% in the non-social welfare areas. This was the difficult area, the area that required Ministers to apply a bit of imagination, to actually invest their intelligence in changing the way they ran their system, to get more with less. The Minister shirked that responsibility to make those reforms and as a result it is the front line, those low-paid public servants who will pay from the very first euro. It is people on social welfare under 66 years who will pay. The Minister has asked them to pony up because he was not willing to confront the sort of change that is needed.

The Government should have adopted each proposal in the McCarthy report as it came, and be seen to be driving a rationalisation programme from the outset, sitting down and negotiating with trade unions from the very start and announcing that this was part of a jobs strategy. It should have appealed for solidarity from all those working in the public service as well as the private sector in order to create an employment strategy. Instead the Government has disastrously mishandled those negotiations and it has left us with the public service that is angry and demoralised. This is a tragedy. Most people I talk to in the public service know that costs in the public service will need to be cut if we are to trade our way out and rebuild a strong economy that creates employment. They know that but they want to be part of a strategy that shows solidarity with something bigger that is being created, a real employment strategy. The Minister did not go to them with an employment strategy in which they could believe, in which they could see that their sacrifice was going to be contributing to a bigger picture, an agenda of change, not just in the public service but reinvesting in the economy and reinventing the economy. The Minister went to them with a demand for pay cuts alone but where was the wider strategy to bring down costs, where was the commitment to confront boardroom pay, the rip-off that we see in our shops every day? Where was the commitment to drive down utility prices, to freeze Government charges? Where was the commitment to cut commercial rents that are killing businesses by the day? The Minister needed to show that the effort he was asking for from public servants — which was valid — was matched by an equal determination to confront costs right across the economy. We have lots of people in the sheltered sector who are not confronting those costs and who are making businesses go to the wall. If the Minister could have enlisted people’s support behind such a strategy, they would respond but the Minister lacked the ambition and the determination to take on those interest groups who have been too cosy, too close to Government in the past. This is what has let us down. We have been left with damaging cross-fire between the public and the private sectors. The public sector will never succeed without a vibrant private sector and the private sector will never succeed unless the public sector can be reformed and become more effective. We work together. We needed a sense of togetherness and willingness to confront these problems together and instead the Minister has left a residue of bitterness and division which is doing us no good.

It was vital that people should regard this budget as being fair. We expected much more in terms of asking people who are better-off to contribute to the cost. Fine Gael proposed that those earning over €75,000 would pay the full 4% PRSI levy all the way up but that was not adopted. We proposed radical reform in pension relief, targeted at the higher paid and that has not been adopted. We proposed the wiping out of many of the tax shelters but that has not been adopted.

I agree the Minister has adopted the residency rule and set a maximum tax but the figures tell it all. Nothing will be achieved from that measure this year and even next year it will only be €55 million. We were targeting a contribution of 600 million contribution from the better-off in our community. That balance was needed and it has been missed. However, there is a greater unfairness in this budget. Where is the fairness in the way the banking crisis has been handled? How could it be fair that those who created this problem still circle the wagons and appoint two insiders to run those banks that brought us to our knees? How can it be fair to ask the taxpayer to shoulder an extra €7 billion in paying for these impaired assets simply to protect the professional investors in these banks? How can it be fair that good businesses are now perishing because what the banks are doing is using the money the Minister gave them to protect their interests, not to rebuild a strong economy that is conscious of the needs of small business? They say that is what they are doing and that is what one would expect them to do unless the Minister intervenes to make it different.

Who is being brought to book for all this? That is what people ask me every day and I am sure they also ask the Minister the same question. Who is being brought to book for the appalling things that were done in our banks? No one has yet been brought to book. Where is the change so that we can be sure that what happened in the past will not occur again? We still do not see that change happening.

There is a void at the heart of this Government, a void in the nerve centre of this system of governance that should be driving Ireland to have a revitalised public sector at the heart of economic growth. This is a unique time of opportunity for the public sector. It controls assets that are vital to our recovery and it controls budgets that have to be managed effectively. It needs leadership in this budget and it has not happened. Fundamental changes have to start with politics and we have not seen that here. We have not seen it in the way Ministers are dealing with their own pay nor have we seen it in a willingness to confront the fact that the Oireachtas has become too big. Fine Gael has proposed getting rid of the Seanad and reducing the size of the Dáil. We should start by reforming these Houses as part of a bigger, ambitious plan to reform the country.

This is the 50th anniversary of the Lemass and Whitaker economic plan for development. Things were very similar because then as now, Ireland had years of failed policies and then as now, there were powerful interests that did not want to see change. However, what happened then did not happen now; then we had Ministers who were willing to set ambition out to be determined to confront change, to take the actions that were necessary. That is the sort of leadership we need again. The Government has failed to seize the moment. I suspect that because it is the architect of much of what has gone wrong, it has spent too much time in denial, too much time in explaining and pretending it was not its fault, to actually have the courage to make the changes we need. This budget has not started to shape the authentic economy to rebuild this country. It has not started to shape a modern public service that could rebuild the lean, fit and quality public service that is needed for the future. It has not started to mould a social contract which people could believe in, a social contract built around reform in our health system so that the two-tier service could be ended, a social contract around reforming the pensions system so we would not have people abandoned — as happened the workers in Waterford Crystal — with nothing. We need to see that thinking coming from the heart of Government. We need that sort of leadership. History has taught us the folly of many armchair generals who were too preoccupied with themselves to keep up with changing technology and who were oblivious to warnings, who produced moth eaten strategies as if they were a modern way of fighting wars.

What did they do? They sent young people over the top into the teeth of gunfire which mowed them down. In many ways, we are in an economic war. Our defences are weak, our equipment is not modern and our generals have failed us. We need real leadership from Government. At its core, what is wrong with this budget is that leadership has been lacking. It is further proof that those who got us into this mess do not have the ability to fix what they have broken. They do not have the vision, authority, courage or policies.
