I welcome the opportunity to speak on this budget for several reasons. We are all aware of the challenges facing the people and the country. This budget is a first instalment in an attempt to address that difficulty. We must all acknowledge that this budget which is taking money from the vulnerable, will cause pain and difficulties for those people. Equally we must acknowledge the need for an honest debate. We cannot deny that this country is in a parlous state on a number of fronts. First and foremost is the difficulty with the budget deficit and a shrinking economy that has left tax receipts much lower than anticipated for several years. Equally we have the issue of recapitalisation of our banks to try to stimulate credit flow through the economy to encourage the broader investment required to expand the economy again. Those two factors put great pressure on any government formulating a budget.

[508]Some of the comments from the other side of the House have been disingenuous for several reasons. Most people are conscious that social welfare supports those at the lower end of the socio-economic groupings and is something this party has continually supported in recent years in good times. I am very proud of what our party has achieved in government. There appears to be air-brushing of history as if we never made any strides in supporting those who are vulnerable, carers, those with disabilities and those on State pensions. No Minister for Finance would lightly come to the House and publish a budget with a reduction in social welfare payments. However, if we do not pass the budget and bring forward a four-year plan, we put at risk everything we have achieved to date. As a country and a society we have achieved a considerable amount. It behoves all of us in highlighting the difficulties and acknowledging the problems we are facing to come up with proposals and ideas to address those difficulties as opposed to outlining in broad brush terms that the Government has somehow failed people and society.

The issue of the bank guarantee and the Government support for the banking institutions in 2008 have been continually bandied around the House. While it has been continually discussed, people will not acknowledge that the reports by Professor Honohan and Messrs. Regling and Watson have indicated clearly that a substantial bank guarantee was required in September 2008 for a number of reasons, primarily that the banks were in danger of imminent collapse. People seem to believe the bank guarantee was introduced just to support the banks as if the Government had another choice. It had no choice on the night other than coming in to guarantee depositors and senior bondholders simply because the banks would not have been able to access money the following morning in the markets and as everyone knows if a bank runs out of money it leads to a systemic collapse of the broader economy. Members of this House should be honest about that matter. I acknowledge it was a very difficult decision to make but at least any independent analysis of it should accept the reports of Professor Honohan and others who were brought in to evaluate and adjudicate independently whether it was the right decision.

Inherently it was the right decision.

As a member of Fianna Fáil I am hurt over the accusation being bandied about by the Opposition that somehow we guaranteed Anglo Irish Bank because it was a Fianna Fáil bank. If we are to believe that, why did Deputies Noonan and Bruton, who are blue-blooded Fine Gael people, invest in Anglo Irish Bank? Why did they purchase Anglo Irish Bank shares if they knew it was a Fianna Fáil bank?

If we are to address the underlying challenges facing the people, let us have an honest debate here. We all know we need a budget adjustment over the next four years of approximately €14 billion and this is the first instalment of €6 billion. I accept it will very difficult on the people, but if anybody can show me an easier path out of the difficulties in which we find ourselves, I will gladly take it on board. Unfortunately to date we have heard polar opposite views from the Opposition. The potential Fine Gael-Labour coalition should be called the Fine Gael-Labour collision because they are on a collision course on everything discussed in this House and yet they claim a coherent story is coming from the Opposition.

There are certainly honest differences, but I do not think they can be compatible.

I am not lecturing anybody; I am just highlighting perceived differences between the Opposition parties.

I am as entitled to say it in this House as anybody else is. Equally I am entitled to defend our position as a political party and a Government. I find it very disingenuous for people to consistently——

That has been highlighted to the Deputy.

To consistently air-brush what our political party has achieved over many decades of service to the country is totally unacceptable and I am entitled to defend my position on that.

Regarding how Ireland can address the underlying difficulties, I accept that we have a budgetary difficulty that is very challenging — not for the Government that can make these decisions but in the context of the impact it will have on people’s lives, including those on social welfare, those who have lost their jobs and those in fear of losing their homes. It must be acknowledged that the four-year plan has been published and supported by the European institutions and the IMF. For people to suggest that we have surrendered our sovereignty is simplistic and undermines the sheer reality of what faces the State. It would be completely irresponsible for any government to propose a budget on 7 December knowing it could not fund it when the State’s cash reserves run out in June or July 2011. We have a duty as a Government and as a Parliament to at least acknowledge that the State is now funded for several years and can get on with dealing with the serious challenges that face us. Equally we are able to fund the services the Government has build up over many years.

We have had a very difficult time as a people. Most parliamentarians come in here with genuine beliefs and want to represent the views of their constituents. However, we also have a duty to ensure that there is a positive image that gives hope to the people. While I accept the people are shattered at this time, we can certainly get through the crisis with leadership and [510]by facing the challenges in an honest manner and at least being up-front and showing what the Opposition would do or what we would do if returned to government. People need to have this honest debate.

The Government has invested enormous amounts in social welfare, education and health. However, in the area of economic recovery we have invested vast sums — and will continue to do so — in promoting indigenous companies and in attracting foreign direct investment. It behoves all of us to send out a positive signal that Ireland is still a country with positive fundamental aspects. It has a very well educated and flexible workforce — while some people might argue it is too flexible, Deputy Higgins and I can have that argument another time. Given these two factors coupled with investment in infrastructure, it is still a country where we can attract and are attracting large levels of foreign direct investment. Whether in opposition or in government everybody in this House who recently endorsed the 12.5% corporation tax rate should send out those positive messages. The damage that some of the discourse is having on Ireland is unacceptable. For the sake of everybody, let us have honest debate and be up-front with people while at the same time meeting the challenges in a positive way as opposed to continually promulgating doomsday scenarios.
