I entered the Chamber during the speech being made by the Minister of State, Deputy Mary White, and feel bound to say that there reaches a stage where, if language has no meaning, debate is very difficult. The Minister of State’s main claim for her time in Government and for the budget is how they protect education. If there is one thing this budget does not do, it is that it does not protect education. I am amazed that anybody on the Government side of the House could make such a claim. Some 1,200 teachers are to be taken out of the system, Youthreach is to be cut, fees are to be implemented for post leaving certificate students, fees are to be introduced for school transport and an unspecified number of psychologists are to be removed from the system. The Minister of State suggests that is protecting education.

I have had occasion to visit Senior College Ballyfermot a number of times, a college with many bright, enterprising, exciting, innovative young people. They are there because they have a thirst for education and because their parents could not afford to send them to orthodox third level education. What has been done now? We have imposed a fee on them. Therefore, I do not understand how the Minister of State can make the claim she did about her area.

In the area of the Minister of State beside her, Deputy Peter Power, some €35 million was cut from the ODA budget. Let us at least have our discussion on the basis of reality.

I am prepared to accept what the Minister of State at the Department of Finance, Deputy Mansergh, said about the great progress he has made in ramping up flood relief. I am not in a position to challenge that and I am willing to accept his word on it.

However, it is very sad to see what has happened to education in an economy that needs to invest in education.

I have expressed the view previously that when the history of this remarkable period is written, the Opposition will be indicted for having made an error with regard to the motion of no confidence that was to be moved a few weeks ago, when the drift seemed to be demoralising the people and there appeared to be no progress. The reason the Opposition refused to proceed with the motion was that we were told a four year plan that was critical to the future was about to be published, that the IMF was at the door and it was necessary to bring in a budget. So it has transpired. Yesterday, we listened to the Minister for Finance and to his little history lesson yesterday, which was entirely at variance with the facts, to such an extent that one doubts the truth of how all of this period has been presented.

First, the Minister told us that things were turning around until some malign influence got its hands on the economy during the month of August and that as a result things started to whirl out of control. The Minister arrived at the Fianna Fáil think tank and, for the first time, said the €3 billion settled on looked like it would not be enough. There was uproar as a result, [501]but before one could say Jack Robinson, a sum of €6 billion became the matter of fact new orthodoxy that had to be taken out of the system. Anybody who thinks that in our small economy €6 billion is somehow an abstract figure will know once he has read the budget what exactly it means for ordinary citizens the length and breadth of the country, both employed and unemployed. The ESRI expressed its open disquiet about what removing €6 billion will do to our economy and I am reliably informed that the IMF was of the view that €4.5 billion would have been more appropriate.

What happened is that the €6 billion was the last throw of the dice in order to fend off the markets. That is why the figure of €6 billion was brought forward. As far as the Government was concerned, if the IMF was to come into Ireland, it was not to happen until the new Government was ensconced, but then Chancellor Merkel made her statement at Deauville and that brought everything forward by a number of months. The result is that the IMF came in anyway and the four year plan was published and we were told it was a great work of creativity by the Government. Frankly, I do not believe any of that. I believe the plan was being worked on by Brussels and that the preparations were being made for the intervention of outside assistance long before that. It went on for weeks. This four year plan is a creation of our new masters and the Government acquiesced in it. Now we are stuck with it. The Government had put the €6 billion into the public arena and could not pull it back. We are now stuck with the €6 billion, notwithstanding the view of the IMF.

What happened then was that the ECB called a halt because it had enough of the voracious appetite of our banks for liquidity, based on borrowings that no longer had collateral backup that was acceptable to it. The result, notwithstanding the attempts by the Government to stave off the day until a new Government came into office, was that the IMF came into the regime, in a fitting final chapter to the lifetime of the Government. It is like the revelation by the Minister, Deputy Gormley, under pressure last Saturday. I find it beyond belief that since 29 September 2008, Minister after Minister on that side of the House has lied about the circumstances in which the guarantee was arrived at. The Minister, Deputy Gormley, said that it was decided at a Cabinet meeting on the Sunday and that the Taoiseach and Minister for Finance agreed the details on Monday night. The Taoiseach said it was discussed on the margins of a Cabinet meeting on Sunday and was decided on the Monday night. Which was it? Does the Government any longer know what the truth is?

If we could be misled about something as big as the guarantee, how can 

I withdraw the imputation against any individual as I do not want it to distract from the point I am making, which is that for two years the Ministers over there, including Minister Hanafin, in whose mouth butter would not melt, told us that the bankers arrived at the gates of Government Buildings after the markets closed on Monday and the two Brians were railroaded into the decision that was made. Now we have the Minister for the Environment, Heritage and Local Government, Deputy John Gormley, telling us the decision was made the previous day at a Cabinet meeting. One can call that “untruths”, “misleading the House” or whatever one likes, but it is what happened.

The result — this is why there is grave concern about what has happened — is that what has happened has put the successor Government, whatever its composition, into a straitjacket. For example, if one looks at the framing of the Financial Emergency Measures in the Public Interest (No. 2) Bill which is to be taken tomorrow, it makes this quite plain in its citations. The Government is bound by the agreement entered into with the EU, IMF and the European Financial Stability Facility, just like its successors will be bound by it notwithstanding the fact that it did not have the guts to bring it before the House for a vote of approval.

As the limited time left to me does not permit me to speak about the treatment of carers and widows, I will confine my remarks to the Taoiseach’s criticism and misrepresentation of the Labour Party’s position on income tax. In misrepresenting our position, he conveniently forgot to tell the House that our income tax proposals would have cost an additional €870 million in a full year. The Government’s proposals will cost €1.2 billion in a full year.

That is a figure for total tax not income tax.

We have outlined them in our document, from capital gains tax and acquisitions tax——

The main ones are the property based tax incentives and the huge pension pots. The Taoiseach tries to claim the Labour Party’s tax proposals are an attack on the working man. I do not know many working men who are concerned about their section 23 write-downs, capital allowances or huge personal pension pots.

I suspect the Taoiseach is well aware that he completely misrepresented our position, even if one ignores the universal social charge. That charge will discriminate against the lowest earners in our society, who are already hit by the minimum wage. The 6% of people being dragged into the tax net for the first time will be subject to the universal social charge once they earn more than €4,000 per annum. The charge also discriminates in favour of the highest earners.
