I said last night that I was ready to support this budget and I believed it to be in the best interest of this State. I do not want to play politics with this decision unlike my colleagues across the floor of the House. Possibly the political thing to do would be to reject the budget, but I do not believe the interests of the people I represent would be served by putting politics before conscience.

It is my priority to get the ECB and the IMF out of Ireland and the only way I can see us doing that is to straighten out our finances. We have to get our house in order.

We could be looking at a scenario where we would not have the funds to pay our public servants in March or April next year if we did not adopt this budget.

There are elements in the budget that I welcome. I have had a number of meetings with the Chief Whip, the Minister of State, Deputy Curran and with the Minister for Finance, Deputy Brian Lenihan. The Deputies opposite will get an opportunity to contribute.

[513]I am happy to see that some of my policies have been incorporated in yesterday’s budget, including the commitment for 15,000 additional employment activation places, the employment and investment incentives for the financing of SMEs and the tax relief for home improvements. The capping of maximum pay rates is a welcome step, although it is not low enough, and I want it to be pursued relentlessly. The quangos must also be dealt with. We cannot pussyfoot around these issues; we have to deal with them.

There are a number of other issues, including that concerning subcontractors. The Bill dealing with subcontractors or the tax change in this area will help to create jobs. There is also the matter of a number of Bills to be brought before the House before our colleagues get the opportunity to go to the public so that we can all be judged on our standpoint. We badly need to get the Bill dealing with subcontractors and the Student Support Bill through this House as well as many more Bills. I will be back on board as long as I consider issues are fair

The Deputies opposite sought more pay all along the way in recent budgets. The Deputies opposite sought to ensure that people got more pay, more quangos and more people serving on boards.

All they wanted was their own people serving on boards.

We will see what their commitments are. I will not be lectured by some of my colleagues across the House.

I welcome the change in regard to ministerial cars and other such changes. We have to tackle the lard. We went after the minimum wage which I do not believe was right but we must tackle the waste, bring down the maximum wage and enforce the provision in that respect religiously.

