Anybody listening to that speech who was not acquainted with the true facts of what is happening in our country would assume we had a balance of payments in surplus, full employment and that we were leaders on a world scale.

[435]The Taoiseach has not been straight with the people. He started off this morning by saying it is important to be straight with people. The Taoiseach was not straight in terms of the fundamental question about banks when he was asked if Anglo Irish Bank was a question of liquidity or solvency. He said liquidity, and his Minister for Finance said that also, but that was not the case. He was not straight with the people when he said that the ECB and the IMF were at our shores to take away our economic sovereignty, cast away by his party, the great Republican party, after all these years. He has not been straight with the people in telling them about what he calls employment stabilisation. That is the new term for emigration, and our people are in Canada, America, Australia and every other country. They are going, going, going, as the poet said, and we cannot bid them stay. That is because of the direct failure of the Taoiseach’s Government and his inability to deal with the problems of our country or to face the crises he has let develop over the years. If anything is eating away at the internal dynamics of this Government it is the Taoiseach’s own failures and his lack of recognition of those failures in the past number of years.

The Taoiseach said this morning that he cast doubt on Fine Gael’s numbers and that they did not add up.

They were costed by the Department of Finance and not a single journalist or economist has cast any aspersions on those but what the Taoiseach did not admit was that there was a fairer way of dealing with achievement of the targets we have accepted in the national interest. The massive income taxes on low and middle income families in the budget are expected to raise €830 million for the Taoiseach’s Government next year.

The cuts to payments for the disabled, the blind, the carers and widows are saving a further €90 million. We pointed out that those savings, and more, could have been achieved by different methods including an additional €260 million in public service payroll savings, including bigger cuts at the top, and a more ambitious rationalisation programme than this Government is intending to achieve through the Croke Park deal. An additional €340 million could be saved by closing tax breaks for the rich, including an immediate suspension of legacy property based reliefs for developers which was extended by the Taoiseach as Taoiseach and as Minister for Finance, and an additional €700 million from cutting the cost of pensions tax relief, particularly for the well heeled. These figures were costed by the Department of Finance, and they add up.

Perhaps we should suspend all business and just talk about what is contained in page 15 of the Taoiseach’s script. It reads: “Our five year integrated plan for trade, tourism and investment will generate 300,000 jobs and boost exports by one third.” How is that being straight with the people? Where are the statistics to back up that?

It refers to 300,000 jobs but there are 429,000 on the live register.

The Taoiseach says his plan will generate these jobs but there are no backups to any of those figures. The Taoiseach is not being straight in that regard. For instance as was pointed out yesterday by Deputy Noonan, many of the figures contained in this budget document are not backed up by any policy decisions. Page B.15, on activation measures, states that a reduced live register from a more intensive labour activation strategy will yield €100 million. Where is that? On administrative efficiencies, it states that there will be a reduction in expenditure on departmental administration yielding €11 million. What is that about? On other measures, it states that a range of other measures relating to control, eligibility and structural reform will be announced at a later date, yielding €49 million.

In the Department of Communications, Energy and Natural Resources, €6.2 million will be saved on the Vote in respect of TG4. The administrative efficiencies in the Department of Community, Equality and Gaeltacht Affairs amount to €10 million. There is €380 million from the Department of Health and Children in demand-led schemes savings — is that generic drugs? — and other procurement and non-core pay savings of €200 million. There is an estimated payroll saving from the voluntary exit package of €123 million.

In the Department of Justice and Law Reform, the Taoiseach might explain the Garda management efficiencies of €20 million. What is that about? Where is the policy decision that underlines that so that people can understand what it is that he is being straight about with them?

On regional airports, for the Tánaiste, it states that curtailment of support for regional air services from mid-2011 will yield €5 million. That directly affects Donegal, Sligo, Knock, Galway and Kerry. The Tánaiste might explain that when she speaks.

Yesterday was the Minister for Finance’s fourth budget in two years. It is my sincere hope that it will be the Taoiseach’s party’s last budget for many years to come for the party opposite has shown that it is incapable of learning from its mistakes. This budget, like the Minister’s previous efforts, is devoid of hope, ideas and imagination. It is a budget devised by bean counters to meet the fiscal targets set by outsiders. It is the product of a Minister who knows the price of everything and the value of nothing.

[437]The Irish people do not need to be told just how bad things are. They know it only too well from their daily lives. Because they know times are tough, they never expected that this budget would be easy but the very least they expected was that the budget would be fair. Instead, they got a series of proposals from the Minister that widened the gap between those at the top and those at the bottom. The statistic I quoted earlier makes it clear. Before this budget the Taoiseach’s salary was 13 times the minimum wage and after this budget his salary is 14 times the minimum wage. How can he possibly justify such unfairness in a situation like this? That is not the worst of it.

Buried in the numbers is a savage reduction of €8 per week in the income of carers, of widows, of the blind and of those with a disability. We all remember the posters from Fianna Fáil that read health cuts hut the old, the sick and the handicapped. The €8 reduction hurts the quality of the lives of the carers, those with a disability, the blind and the widows. Let us be clear about this: there is absolutely no economic, moral or social case for cutting the income of vulnerable groups such as these, especially when there is a clear alternative. The exclusion of all these would have cost the State €96 million. This would have been paid for by the proposal from my party to completely overhaul the welfare system and establish a single payment and entitlement service. The Taoiseach may well laugh, smirk and grin at it, but he is responsible for deliberately driving a wedge and a stake through the quality of life of so many hundreds of thousands of low and middle-income families.

It is the Government who has taken the cut in income from widows, the blind, those with a disability and carers.

The Taoiseach may cast them aside. He may think it is funny. It is not.

The Government has chosen the easy way out again. It chose to target the vulnerable rather than risk upsetting the powerful vested interests by introducing radical reform.

This budget is incredibly harsh on low and middle-income families. Under the Government’s proposal a family with one earner and three children earning €40,000 a year will see its annual income fall by almost €1,700. The same family’s after-tax income would have been €1,500 per year better off under Fine Gael’s alternative plan, which also saw the deficit being reduced by €6 billion. The Taoiseach did not give any credit for the acceptance of the targets over a four year period by my party.

Our four year plan was costed by the Department of Finance.

Where is the fairness in targeting hard-working families who may be burdened with negative equity and who have rising utility bills and the prospect of even more expensive mortgages?

Ireland also desperately needed a budget with a clear and credible plan to grow the economy and give our young people some hope for the future. What we got instead was a budget that contains no strategy for growth, no strategy for reform and no strategy for jobs beyond the bland statement which is here, which the Taoiseach has repeated on a dozen occasions in the past 12 months, that his plan says 300,000 jobs over the next five years. The Taoiseach has never backed up any one of those jobs with concrete evidence.

There is nothing in this budget that comes any way close to matching either the scale or the ambition of Fine Gael’s NewERA stimulus plan to create jobs and to improve competitiveness. Likewise, there is no plan to reform the public sector or to change the way the political system works. These are three fundamental failures of the Government. Even relatively minor proposals, such as Fine Gael’s suggestion that the jobs tax on low-income employees should be reduced, have been rejected even though we have shown how they could be paid for through aggressive cost reductions in the public services.

This stale, unfair and out-of-touch budget confirms one point clearly. The Government is exhausted, jaded and out of ideas.

It has run out of ideas and it is run out of time. It has locked itself away in a bunker of its own making, afraid of change and suspicious of any new thinking that comes from the outside.

The best and final service that the Taoiseach and his Minister could render now is to allow the people to give a new Government a fresh and clear mandate, which issue now rests entirely with the Green Party which is absent from the House.

Gabh mo leithscéal, ní fhaca mé suas ansin é. Tá an Teachta Gogarty chomh fada suas ansin.

The people will have a number of choices. They can vote for the Fianna Fáil Party that has devastated the economy, undermined the Republic and cast away our economic independence, the party which, egged on by its former allies, introduced all of the worst excesses of the free market to Ireland. Alternatively, they can vote for parties of the left, which have committed in some cases to massive tax increases but have not yet spelled out [439]the details of their plans for the way ahead, or they can vote for my party whose plan to rebuild the country rejects simplistic notions on a political spectrum of right and left, a party whose only allegiance is to the people and which is not tied, either to big business or powerful unions. Fine Gael, in government, will keep taxes as low as possible, not for any ideological reasons but because international evidence shows quite clearly that this is the best way to create jobs and to generate growth. As Deputy Noonan pointed out yesterday, no country has ever taxed its way back to prosperity.

This party will also reform government and make it leaner, not because of any hostility to the public sector but because we can only protect front line services if we reduce costs and increase efficiency. I have listened to people making wild statements that Fine Gael wanted to get rid of 30,000 front line teachers, nurses and gardaí. How stupid can they be? The point is that we respect the work of public services and our proposal is based entirely on the retention of front line services such as those provided by nurses, gardaí and teachers.

I might add that, as has been pointed out by many, if it costs €90,000 to train a young Irish nurse who is one of the best qualified in the world, and they all have gone away and some returned to be employed on an agency basis, what the Government has done has been to allow proliferation of administrative bureaucracy that is to the detriment of those front line services which the Government has always cut as a first instance.

We have also pointed out that it is important to lead from the top and the front and deal with the issues of the Houses, this Chamber, Government, the cost of governance and the way it operates. A story is circulating that the Cabinet has discussed the abolition of the Seanad by referendum on the day of the general election. This is some conversion on the road to Damascus if it is true, as the Taoiseach and his Ministers have vehemently rejected the proposal during the recent period.

Fine Gael in government will tackle the deficit, not because we believe in austerity, but because Ireland can regain its sovereignty only by returning to the international money markets as soon as possible. Almost two years ago, the Taoiseach informed the House, “as long as I am running this Government I will run the Government as I see fit”.

That is what the Taoiseach said.

I will certainly run it in a very different way to yours, Brian.

The Taoiseach’s absent colleagues have no faith or confidence in him and want him out. The Minister for Environment, Heritage and Local Government wants the election by the end of January. Wait and see. If the Taoiseach decides to be on this side of the House, then fair enough. He will see what a good government will do in the interests of the people and not carry on the way he carried on for the past ten years.

As one of the Ministers said to me previously, when one is on antibiotics one becomes immune to things after 13 years. That is what is wrong with the Government. It is flattened, jaded, exhausted, out of ideas and out of time.

This is why we accepted the overall targets set out. This is why we accepted a €6 billion adjustment for this year and a €9 billion adjustment over the next three years. Not only did we accept this, but we put down our four year plan costed to deal with it. When we met the IMF and the ECB, they made it perfectly clear that in the context of the plan approved and signed off by the Taoiseach — not in my name or in the people’s name but by the Government — they are quite prepared to listen to alternative proposals that can be stronger, better and more inventive in the interests of the country than what the Taoiseach put into it.

I stated there would be no income tax increases for 2011. It could have been done a different way. Ask the thousands of middle-income and low-income families being fleeced by Fianna Fáil.

The point is that the Taoiseach did not tell people the truth. He was not straight with them about the IMF or the ECB. These people have now taken away our economic independence. The Taoiseach cashed in our sovereignty and it is our job to see they are sent home as quickly as possible.

The Taoiseach’s first mistake was to believe his own party’s propaganda and to believe that investors would reward Ireland if the Government, as he once said, just wrote whatever cheques were necessary for the banks. As Fine Gael predicted on more than one occasion, this blank cheque policy has failed completely. A few months back, in an article in The New York Times, a reporter asked whether one bank could bring down a country. Unfortunately, we now know the answer. By pouring so much money into Anglo Irish Bank and by failing to insist that bondholders should share in the pain of rescuing the banks, the Taoiseach turned a banking crisis into a national crisis and every person in the next generation [441]will have this responsibility on their shoulders. If it were not for the Government’s failed banking policy, it is highly probable that Ireland would not have needed the IMF bailout.

The Taoiseach asked me how this party would have handled it. It would have been handled very differently. We would have used the period of stability provided by the bank guarantee to restructure the banks and impose losses on banks’ investors. From the start we were the first party to recognise that Anglo Irish Bank could never survive as a commercial entity and needed to be wound down. The Taoiseach scoffed at that. We were also the first party to argue that it was completely unfair for the Irish people to shoulder all of the losses for our banks, and that it was only fair that the people who had lent recklessly to the banks should share in that pain. As the Taoiseach knows, it is a basic rule of capitalism that if one lends recklessly to failed institutions, one must take the consequences — a basic rule that he deliberately decided to ignore. Two half years on, we still have not been able to break into the encrypted files in Anglo Irish Bank. Nobody has been sent to jail, nobody has been prosecuted and nobody has been brought before the courts where the law of the land should apply.

The Taoiseach’s second mistake was to believe that spending cuts and tax increases could by themselves fix the deficit. However, as Deputy Michael Noonan pointed out yesterday, no country has ever taxed its way out of recession. Nations have only ever grown their way out of recession. This is why Fine Gael developed its NewERA stimulus plan, which the Minister for Finance originally welcomed and then rejected. The results have been all too predictable, miserable economic growth necessitating even more spending cuts and tax increases. The recent decision by the European Commission to revise down its growth projection for Ireland in 2011 confirms that it too lacks any sense of confidence in the Government’s growth policies.

These mistakes can be laid directly at the Taoiseach’s door and the door of the Minister for Finance. They have destroyed our economy and the morale and confidence of the Irish people. There is nothing in the budget speech or in the Taoiseach’s contribution today that reaches out to those young people pondering their future and wondering what subjects they should take to leaving certificate so that they might have a job in 2018. Those now being forced to leave again are getting no response from the Government about a future of any confidence for them and neither are those young people in limbo with regard to the right to finish their apprenticeships clearly and confidently so that they have a certificate that stands up all over the world if they want to go. The Taoiseach has not done anything in respect of the 60,000 undocumented in the United States. He speaks a lot about them but not much is happening. The Irish people are angry and very afraid. They are afraid for their future because the Government offers no hope, confidence or vision. What was done in yesterday’s budget was to consign thousands of middle and lower income families to further penury, pressure and stress.

Our economic sovereignty has been seriously eroded. It is humiliating for a proud country like this to be placed in this position by an incompetent Government and reckless activities. However, now is not the time for despair nor the time to sink beneath waves of disillusionment and despondency. This is a time for a change of emphasis, direction and motivation to galvanise our people, as they have often done in previous times of adversity, to rise to meet this challenge, as we can.

I have defended the Taoiseach and his Government and our foreign direct investment programme in the United States and in Brussels on more than one occasion. We support very strongly the 12.5% corporation tax rate. I have made this point in Brussels and I will do so again. The Irish people signed it into the Lisbon treaty; it is a cornerstone of our investment programme. We all know the projections for many multinationals are very strong for the future and we must support this. However, the loss of competitiveness in our indigenous manufacturing sector and the lack of confidence that the Government has engendered in the spirit of our [442]people are doing down our country and the Government will never recover or be able to recapture that type of enlightened attitude from our people because it has let them down and hurt them in their pockets and hurt their spirit. It has failed in its duty in this regard.

The only response of the Minister for Education and Skills to the international education assessment published recently which showed Ireland slipped to 15th or 17th place in the European league was to state we must do more to improve literacy and numeracy.

This is like her predecessor speaking about happy parents, happy teachers and happy families. Huge amounts of rent are being paid for prefab buildings in dilapidated conditions. So much more could have been done.

They were the Minister’s words yesterday. She stated we must do more and make a major effort in literacy and numeracy.

The evidence internationally is that our teenage students have slipped in the area of literacy for which the Minister, Deputy Coughlan, is now directly responsible. In every Ministry she has held, she has failed to live up to the reputation with which she came.

Fine Gael will continue to set out its own strategy, which will be about changing the way our politics work and will ask the people for the opportunity to abolish Seanad Éireann. It will reduce the number of Deputies and change this theatre here and make it a place where the big announcements are made, where transparency is evident, where accountability is had and where Ministers respond to legitimate questions from Members. We will implement our NewERA stimulus plan to provide over 100,000 jobs through commercial entities dealing with water, communications and renewables. We will reform the banking system so that we will never again have a situation where greed and incompetence will bring down the entire country. We will reinvent Government and transform our health system by bringing the Dutch model of health care to Ireland.

For all of this to happen, Ireland needs the kind of rational, reforming Government that Fine Gael provided in the past and will provide again in the not too distant future. What it does not need is a continuation of an incompetent Government of abject recklessness that lacks compassion for the people and the times in which they now live. These times are too dangerous. The problems we face are too serious for a Government that continues to cripple the spirit of Ireland and our people and which continues to destroy any prospect of growth with sky high taxes and to leave in place waste and inefficiency. There is nothing in the Government’s document about real reform of the way we deliver our public services.

I speak to multinational companies or small businesses and explain our clear aspiration that by 2016 we should demonstrate that Ireland is the best small country in the world in which to do business. I ask the big firms what Government could do to help them improve the atmosphere and environment in which they do business, whether through planning, transport, communication or energy costs. I asked the person in a small sweet shop in Donegal what he wanted or would like to see a Government doing for him, and he mentioned the abolition of PRSI for lower paid employees and a number of other areas where help could be provided. [443] However, he also pointed out that for his little shop, he needed 21 different licences to operate as a retailer, because of the tunnel vision of all the different independent systems that have no interconnection.

The budget announced yesterday by the Government has completely failed to understand the savings that could be made, the efficiencies that could be created, the respect that could be generated for public services and the dignity of those working in those services who want to give of their best for their country, but cannot because the system the Government has allowed to develop over the years strangles their initiative, creativity and willingness to contribute to their country. I urge the Taoiseach never to forget that the people of this country are pragmatic. If we explain the scale and nature of the problem and the timescale for dealing with it, they will want to contribute, provided their contribution is respected and fair. What was done in yesterday’s budget is palpably unfair. When I asked the Taoiseach a question on it earlier this morning, he did not answer it. Carers, the disabled, the blind and the widowed are all affected and because of all the time the Taoiseach spent dealing with the political issue of the pension problem, he forgot there was a better way to do things. He need not have imposed these cuts on carers, disabled, blind and widowed to save €96 million if he had taken the advice we offered him.

I see nothing in the budget to repair the damage done to Ireland’s international reputation. I have with me a letter from Japan describing how taxi drivers in Osaka speak about Ireland in a negative way because of their perception of our country. The credit of people in the wholesale and retail business is being cancelled in Egypt, India and China because of the situation the Government has allowed to develop. As far as I can see, this budget does not deal with the central issues of vision, growth, job stimulus and investment. It imposes further taxes on jobs and does not deal with the future potential of our country. I decry the continued pathetic attempts of the Government. It is time for it to go and for it to give the people an opportunity to have a say with a new Government.

